Since the widespread introduction of political economy perspectives into planning studies in the 1970 s, the understanding and conceptualization of what power is and how it is exercised has been a major topic of interest, research, and controversy in the field. These debates were revived with the arrival of communicative planning theory in the 1990 s, and received renewed attention due to the influences of planning scholars inspired by Foucault in the 2000 s. Although planning studies have a long tradition of questioning the role of power, there is simultaneously a strong appeal by many planning scholars to better take power issues into account. Creating transparency over existing power structures – e.g. through improved conceptual clarity – is essential because power is a central determining factor of spatial development, including with regards to urban sprawl or densification. Densification is the process leading to compact cities (Bokyo & Cooper, 2011). The positive effects of densification on resource use efficiency tend to cover up potential drawbacks of the compact city for different stakeholders, particularly those with lower income. The policy shift towards densification in many cities worldwide has made conflicting use interests more pronounced because of increased urban land scarcity.
In such a situation, transparency in densification processes leads to publicity and knowledge, encourages public resistance to power abuse, and improves accountability on the part of those exercising power. Only with a clear picture of power structures can a structured discussion—and possibly a renegotiation—take place about the unsustainable consequences of asymmetric power distribution. However, this requires analytical concepts that grasp power structures before they materialize in irremovable bricks and mortar. 
theoretical part is more detailed than the illustrative empirical part, this article intends to “move away from abstract theories of power toward methodological strategies for the study of power in particular situations”. Due to its conflictual nature, densification appears to be an ideal subject to study power in planning. Densification objectives never get implemented on a one-to-one basis. Rather power games influence the way densification objectives can be implemented. Powerful actors are those who know how to promote or protect their own values or interests. For instance, veto rights controlled by powerful stakeholders influence the way densification is being performed. Therefore, to understand urban social challenges under densification pressure, a close analysis of these power games is needed
This article is organized according to its two main objectives. First, we demonstrate how including power awareness in institutional approaches in planning can provide a useful framework for the analysis of present-day challenges in planning such as fighting urban sprawl. Second, we illustrate how this framework can be put to work in the analysis of a densification project in the municipality of Zurich, Switzerland, in which tenants are threatened by acute housing shortages and the imminent demolition of their apartments. 