This article contributes to the conversation on planning's use of power. It expands on current trends related to the so-called new institutional turn in planning. The article aims to (1) develop a conceptual framework that captures the role of power in practical spatial development projects by fusing planning, new institutionalism, and power; and (2) illustrate the potential of this framework with a case study of contentious urban redevelopment in Zurich, Switzerland. The suggested framework offers an alternative perspective on urban densification procedures, which are typically marketed as environmentally friendly and sustainable initiatives. Redevelopment for urban densification creates winners and losers through its effects on the built environment and on existing rights and interests, particularly among residents who cannot afford the higher rent as a result of redevelopment in favor of density. Densification is a great topic to study power in planning because of its contentious nature. To conceptualize and empirically capture the power structures at play in urban development processes, and more specifically in the implementation of densification policies, was the primary goal of the research presented in this article. While research on how to combine the two is still scarce, there is a growing body of literature focusing on the social impacts of densification (Bramley et al., 2009; Williams, 2010; Debrunner et al., 2022) and significant literature on power in planning (Forester, 1989; Ensminger, 1992; Albrechts, 2003). (Balmer and Gerber, 2017) From a normative standpoint, taking into account power issues in planning processes involving densification may assist municipalities in creating tactics to combat trends of social exclusion and combat power abuse. After urban renewal and densification, more and more tenants are being evicted as a result of rising rents. The protection of urban social qualities like social mixing, tenure security, or community cohesion is at risk if city authorities fail to take into account asymmetric power relations. Our findings prompt the question of what these power structures mean for the discipline of planning. Planning circles frequently debate this issue. Our conceptual approach at the intersection of power and neoinstitutionalism offers methodological approaches for the investigation of power in real-world circumstances. We analyze the underlying forces that structure the planning processes and the development of urban space by taking structural forms of power into account in our analysis. If city authorities ignore asymmetric power relations, urban social qualities like social mixing, tenure security, or community cohesion may not be protected. Our findings raise the issue of what these power structures imply for planning as a discipline. This subject is frequently discussed in planning circles. We provide methodological approaches for the investigation of power in actual situations through our conceptual approach at the neoinstitutionalism and power intersection. By considering structural forms of power in our analysis, we examine the underlying forces that shape the planning procedures and the growth of urban space. We are compelled to add a prominent actorial dimension to the neo-Marxist understanding of the construction of space because of our neo-institutionalist approach to spatial planning as a matter of public policy. In politics, there is a mix of force and persuasive reasoning. We have seen competing positions of power in each of the "situations of the exercise of power" shown in Fig. 1. Even the powerful positions in Western democracies must offer (reasonable) justifications for their actions. Power is relational and grows through interactions between individuals or groups of individuals. It is neither absolute nor disembodied. The argumentative space requires the protagonists to defend their positions, legitimize their actions by enlisting institutions or discourses, compel participants to follow the law, etc. Additionally, it can create or draw attention to logical, legal, or legitimate flaws that could create windows of opportunity that could be taken advantage of, leading to institutional innovation and social change. Planning science's function is to draw attention to the formal and informal institutions that govern how space is produced as well as the mechanisms of power. It is possible to reveal (some of) the factors influencing why the city is the way it is by recognizing the function of power in urban production and exposing its potential for abuse. If stakeholders use their agency to take advantage of this chance, this can help shift the balance of power.