This article contributes to the debate on power in planning. It builds on recent developments linked with the socalled new institutional turn in planning. By bridging planning, new institutionalism, and power, the article ambitions to (1) develop a conceptual framework that captures the role of power in concrete spatial development projects, and (2) illustrate the potential of this framework with a real-life example of contested urban redevelopment in Zurich, Switzerland. The proposed framework provides a different picture of urban densification processes which are typically presented as eco-friendly and sustainable initiatives. Through its impact on the built environment and on existing rights and interests, redevelopment for urban densification creates not only winners, but also losers, especially among those inhabitants who cannot afford the higher rent following redevelopment in favor of density. Due to its conflictual nature, densification is therefore an ideal subject to study power in planning.
In this article, our main research objective was to develop a theoryinformed framework to conceptualize and empirically capture the power structures that are at work in urban development processes and more specifically in the implementation of densification policies. While there is a growing body of literature focusing on the social impacts of densification (Bramley et al., 2009; Williams, 2010; Debrunner et al., 2022), and important literature on power in planning (Forester, 1989; Ensminger, 1992; Albrechts, 2003), research on how to combine the two is still thin (Balmer and Gerber, 2017). From a normative perspective, taking into account power issues in planning processes involving densification may help municipalities to develop strategies against power abuse and to counteract trends of social exclusion in a more targeted manner. More and more tenants are forced to leave due to rising rents after urban densification and renewal. If city authorities do not succeed in taking into account asymmetric power relations, the protection of urban social qualities such as social mixing, tenure security, or community cohesion is in danger.
Our results raise the question of the meaning of these power structures for planning as a discipline. This is a much-debated question in planning. Our conceptual approach at the meeting point between neoinstitutionalism and power provides methodological strategies for the study of power in empirical situations. Taking into account structural forms of power in our analysis leads us to analyze the underlying forces that structure the planning processes and the development of urban space. Neo-Marxist approaches insist that the development of the built environment, including densification, corresponds to the spatial and geographic materialization of the forces and processes that structure our economic system, the essential engine of which is the creation and accumulation of capital (Hill, 1977).
But planning’s role is not only “to facilitate accumulation and maintain social control” (Fainstein and Fainstein, 1979: 382), it is also an arena where social conflicts play out. Planning administrations are “physical spaces where social relations are enacted and (re)produced” (Holgersen, 2020: 815). Therein also lies the possibilities for alternative futures. Our neo-institutionalist approach to spatial planning as a public policy pushes us to add a prominent actorial dimension to the neo-Marxist understanding of the construction of space. 
Politics is made up of a mixture of power and rational argument. In each of the “situations of the exercise of power” described in Fig. 1, we have observed conflicting positions of power. In Western democracies, even the dominant positions are required to provide (rational) arguments for acting the way they do. Power is relational and develops in the interactions between actors or groups. It is neither disembodied, nor absolute. The argumentative space obliges the protagonists to rationalize their action, to legitimize actions by mobilizing institutions or discourses, to force stakeholders to respect procedural rules, etc. It can also generate or highlight argumentative, procedural, or legitimacy breaches, which may open up windows of opportunity that can be seized, opening the door to institutional creativity and social change. The role of planning science is to highlight the formal and informal institutions that structure the production of space as well as the mechanisms of power. By identifying the role of power—and unmasking its potential abuse—in urban production, it becomes possible to unveil (some of) the reasons explaining why the city is like it is. This can contribute to shifting balances of power but only if stakeholders use their agency to seize this opportunity.