‘City’ or ‘Urban’ (occasionally ‘Living’) Labs have become a global phenomenon, with presently more than 170 such entities operating in Europe alone. Tasked with developing conceptual and practical tools to engage with, and occasionally steer, urban change and development, the organisational structures of such laboratories vary between locations but associate regularly with pre-existing university structures. From MIT’s justly famous and globally operating ‘Senseable City Lab’ to San Raffaele Scientific Institutes’s (FCSR) City of the Future Living Lab in Milan or its off-beat, culturally focussed local twin Macao and from the privately financed ‘smart city’ focused City Lab Graz, Maastricht’s M-LAB to the postulation of entire urban quarters or even cities as ‘laboraties’, the concept of the ‘lab’ has gained considerable currency and traction since the turn of the millennium. This also includes a number of ‘virtual’ urban labs and entire manufactured cities like Masdar City in Abu Dhabi performing technology-oriented lab-like functions as per design as well experimental cities like Arcosanti, Arizona emerging from urban laboratories.
The present paper probes practices attached to and emanating from ‘labs’ in general before evaluating the suitability of lab-based ideas and activities in the context of an urban regeneration project underway in the former industrial quarter of Nuns’ Island in the city of Galway, Ireland. Given the nascent state of the lab, our approach embraces the need to both better understand practices arising from urban labs and also how we work towards developing genuinely bespoke practices for Galway and similarly structured urban environments. Elements of this working towards included in this paper encompass the reconceptualization of concepts of ‘co-production’, an awareness of wider issues borne of centralisation in Irish governance, a discussion on assemblage urbanism, the dialectic between research and action, the reflexivity on the ‘lab(oratory)’ concept, and, finally, a discussion of elements that favour the setting up and the success of an urban lab in a city like Galway. 
It is perhaps incumbent upon us to highlight that in the world of global urbanization, the above invoked notion of “a city like Galway” cannot be an unquestioned point of departure. As a small urban agglomeration located on the European periphery with presently 80,000 inhabitants, Galway struggles size-wise to be recognized as a city. At the same time, Galway fulfils urban functions with regard to its considerable hinterland, as an internationally recognized tourist hub, as a site in the global production of medical equipment and through the existence of fairly large-scale third-level institutions. One of these institutions, the National University of Ireland Galway, is engaged in a process of urban redevelopment using a number of vacant university owned buildings on Nuns’ Island as anchors to expand beyond its historic mid-nineteenth century campus. Nuns’ Island is a modestly sized 15 acre post-industrial area bounded and intersected by rivers and canals that is situated between NUI Galway and the city’s CBD. A number of the buildings owned by NUI Galway are early 19th century industrial structures that include a six storey former flour mill and a former whiskey distillery that sits prominently along the riverbank. €4.3 million national funding has recently been earmarked to kick-start the redevelopment of Nuns’ Island into an Innovation and Creativity District as part of a wider €53 million investment into the city’s transport infrastructure and public realm through the central government’s Urban Regeneration and Development Fund [URDF]. 
The inclusion of an urban lab in discussions on the redevelopment of Nuns’ Island as well as in the city’s successful UDRF bid is timely. Galway is expected to grow by 50% over the next two decades as the majority of Ireland’s ongoing population rise will be concentrated in regional cities (Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, 2021; Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government, 2021). Yet, this growth is mired in legacy issues surrounding transport and mobility, urban quality and housing affordability and availability. Alongside this is the longstanding centralisation of Irish governance, particularly within the domains of development and planning. This centralisation of power has had a debilitating effect on democratic representation and decision-making at a local level. Indeed, Ireland currently ranks bottom of the Local Autonomy Index among European countries and has a proportion of locally elected representatives to public of 1:440 while the equivalent ratios in France and Germany are 1:120 and 1:350 respectively. This democratic deficit has left a void within local decision-making and accentuates the need for a space oriented towards place-based experimentation that brings together a variety of urban actors across local government, business, community, arts and education. 
In this paper we suggest that in the circumstances outlined above, an urban lab may come to fill a keenly felt democratic deficit while also providing an incubator space for Nuns’ Island that supports activities, projects and interactions between different groups with the aim of creating a more sustainable and liveable city. We contend that practices associated with and emanating from ‘co-produced’ knowledge construction are best suited for such ambitions – and invite readers to think co-production as something other than positioned between the neat binaries of service provider and citizen or designer and end-user that have come to define the concept in the realms of governance and commercial design respectively. In the context of placemaking, co-production rather involves multiple voices and actors developing shared understandings of urban processes and the changes required to future-proof Galway’s growth and development. In marked difference to ‘consultative’ engagements that have come to characterise planning practices in recent decades, ‘co-production’ is always material and thus resonates with the lived experience of stakeholders. 
With NUI Galway furthermore a key player in establishing Urban Lab Galway, it is also necessary to move beyond entrepreneurial and ‘triple helix models’ of academic urban engagement that are geared towards the commercialisation of knowledge and are limited to the interactions between business, government and industry in favour of a more civically minded engagement with the ‘city in the round’ in all its variety. We, the authors of this paper, are not absent in this engagement. Our own individual and collective positionality and reflexive capacities are intimately woven into the following pages: we are members of an academic community that is at once part of and separate from the city of Galway. As professional neighbours to Nuns’ Island, we furthermore welcome the revitalisation of derelict buildings and investment into a more diverse and vibrant urban quarter that may emerge as a result of interventions, some of which may emanate from the Urban Lab presented in this paper. We are, in other words, anything but distant and disinterested bystanders to urban transformative processes.