‘City’ or ‘Urban’ (occasionally ‘Living’) Labs have become a global phenomenon, with presently more than 170 such entities operating in Europe alone. 
From MIT’s justly famous and globally operating ‘Senseable City Lab’ to San Raffaele Scientific Institutes’s (FCSR) City of the Future Living Lab in Milan or its off-beat, culturally focussed local twin Macao and from the privately financed ‘smart city’ focused City Lab Graz, Maastricht’s M-LAB to the postulation of entire urban quarters or even cities as ‘laboraties’, the concept of the ‘lab’ has gained considerable currency and traction since the turn of the millennium.
This also includes a number of ‘virtual’ urban labs and entire manufactured cities like Masdar City in Abu Dhabi performing technology-oriented lab-like functions as per design as well experimental cities like Arcosanti, Arizona emerging from urban laboratories.
The present paper probes practices attached to and emanating from ‘labs’ in general before evaluating the suitability of lab-based ideas and activities in the context of an urban regeneration project underway in the former industrial quarter of Nuns’ Island in the city of Galway, Ireland. 
Elements of this working towards included in this paper encompass the reconceptualization of concepts of ‘co-production’, an awareness of wider issues borne of centralisation in Irish governance, a discussion on assemblage urbanism, the dialectic between research and action, the reflexivity on the ‘lab(oratory)’ concept, and, finally, a discussion of elements that favour the setting up and the success of an urban lab in a city like Galway.
As a small urban agglomeration located on the European periphery with presently 80,000 inhabitants, Galway struggles size-wise to be recognized as a city.
One of these institutions, the National University of Ireland Galway, is engaged in a process of urban redevelopment using a number of vacant university owned buildings on Nuns’ Island as anchors to expand beyond its historic mid-nineteenth century campus. 
A number of the buildings owned by NUI Galway are early 19th century industrial structures that include a six storey former flour mill and a former whiskey distillery that sits prominently along the riverbank.
€4.3 million national funding has recently been earmarked to kick-start the redevelopment of Nuns’ Island into an Innovation and Creativity District as part of a wider €53 million investment into the city’s transport infrastructure and public realm through the central government’s Urban Regeneration and Development Fund [URDF].
Galway is expected to grow by 50% over the next two decades as the majority of Ireland’s ongoing population rise will be concentrated in regional cities (Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, 2021; Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government, 2021). 
Indeed, Ireland currently ranks bottom of the Local Autonomy Index among European countries and has a proportion of locally elected representatives to public of 1:440 while the equivalent ratios in France and Germany are 1:120 and 1:350 respectively.
