This paper details the contextual and conceptual elements involved in setting up an Urban Lab in the city of Galway, Ireland. The paper specifies the set-up of a lab in the post-industrial area of Nuns’ Island, through a detailed reading of pertinent ‘lab-centred’ literatures. It contributes to this literature by (1) analysing a lab in the explicit context of an urban regeneration project and (2) exploring ways in which co-production may be put into practice. Urban Lab Galway is anticipated initially to play a major role supporting the urban regeneration of an area adjacent to a major university, which also owns substantial buildings and land on the site, and is thus not surprisingly supported by the local university in question. The paper motivates and details the reasons supporting co-produced initiatives, critically exploring the potential and difficulties attaching to such practices. The paper ends in a sustained engagement with the concept of ‘creative destruction’ in the context of lab-based engagements.
Returning to Nuns’ Island in the heart of Galway City, we encounter a space that is wearing the signs of Schumpeter’s creative destruction more openly than most places in the West of Ireland. What appears as ‘neglect’ to some is often but the palimpsest of material memory to others – residents, spatially minded scholars (i.e. archaeologists, historians and geographers), ecologists and those passing through. From the start, we regarded the existing multiplicity of materials, stories and environments as a boon for the placing of an urban lab; now we regard the urban lab as a potential multiplier of a richness already present in situ. Beyond the dreaded rhetoric employed by masterplans or similar marketing exercises (which we have participated in more than once), it is the lived and living engagement with the dialectic of transformative processes in which abandonment and neglect create opportunities aplenty: for plants to occupy niches that do not readily exist elsewhere, for entrepreneurial ´elan to dwell where previous forms of entrepreneurial activity succeeded and failed, for the preservation and reinscription of heritage or for untried forms of living together, of mobility and working. This rich tapestry of a presence that is both mindful of its past – not as nostalgia but as potential – while constructively assembling a multitude of possible futures, in short: the deconstructive presence of the lab, is what we have sought to put into place in Galway. In the context of such an assembled set of work principles and possibilities, ‘urban regeneration’ ceases to be a momentary form of intervention and gives way to an ongoing, self-reflective practice of coproduced forms of ‘urban living’: the continuous mitigation and shaping of capitalism’s innermost dynamic. 
As we continue to work on this project, we find ourselves in the midst of an unprecedented interruption of this dynamic caused by a new zoonotic pathogen spreading globally: while we isolate our individual selves and witness an ever-increasing number of interactions gravitate towards some virtual presence or another, major transformations of urban environments grind to a halt. It remains to be seen what kind of explicitly place-based pedagogy can emerge during (or after) a prolonged crisis. We take solace, hope even, from the disruption of wellrehearsed urban routines and taken-for-granted manners of operating and their replacement with actions that can be witnessed in many places in the spring of 2020: from pop-up cycle lanes in Kreuzberg to the reduction of condoned speeds attached to private cars in Milan and Brussels, from the reconquest of differently structured vacant sites by people living within walking distance to the invention of novel forms of social co-existence not solely defined by proximity. We see the future of the city as considerably more ‘up for grabs’ that we had dared imagine a year ago. In addition, we see great value in approaching such possible futures with the help of assemblage-derived tools: if CoVid-19 has invited one realisation pertinent to work on ‘the urban,’ it must surely be the validation of ‘thinking outside the box’ given the obvious validation of experimental modes of thinking and doing. If the deconstruction of ‘participation’ within the context of a locally anchored, pedagogyembracing urban lab described in this paper could aid in the transformation of both Nuns’ Island and Galway, something would indeed have been accomplished.