This essay describes the conceptual and contextual considerations that went into creating an Urban Lab in the Irish city of Galway. The paper describes the configuration of a lab in Nuns' Island's post-industrial area through a thorough reading of relevant "lab-centered" literatures. It adds to the body of literature by (1) analyzing a lab in the specific context of an urban regeneration project and (2) examining potential applications for co-production. Unsurprisingly, the local university in question supports Urban Lab Galway, which is expected to initially play a significant role in supporting the urban regeneration of a region adjacent to a significant university, which also owns significant buildings and land on the site. The paper critically examines the potential and challenges associated with such practices while motivating and outlining the justifications for co-produced initiatives. The conclusion of the paper engages the idea of "creative destruction" in the context of engagements conducted in laboratories. Once again, we find ourselves on Nuns' Island in the center of Galway City, a location that displays the effects of Schumpeter's creative destruction more overtly than most locations in the West of Ireland. What some may perceive as "neglect" is frequently nothing more than the palimpsest of material memory to others, including locals, scholars with a spatial orientation (such as archaeologists, historians, and geographers), ecologists, and those passing through. We initially saw the diversity of materials, narratives, and environments as a benefit for situating an urban lab; today, we see the urban lab as a potential multiplier of a richness already in place. Beyond the dreaded rhetoric used by masterplans or similar marketing exercises (which we have engaged in more than once), it is the lived and living engagement with the dialectic of transformative processes in which abandonment and neglect create opportunities aplenty: for plants to occupy niches that do not readily exist elsewhere, for entrepreneurial "elan" to dwell where previous forms of entrepreneurial activity succeeded and failed, for the preservation and growth of cultural and natural resources, and for the preservation and growth of human communities. We have attempted to establish in Galway this rich tapestry of a presence that is simultaneously mindful of its past - not as nostalgia but as potential - and constructively assembling a wide range of potential futures, or, to put it another way, the deconstructive presence of the lab. 'Urban regeneration' ceases to be a transient form of intervention in the context of such an assembled set of work principles and possibilities and gives way to an ongoing, self-reflective practice of coproduced forms of 'urban living': the continuous mitigation and shaping of capitalism's innermost dynamic. As we continue to work on this project, we discover that a new zoonotic pathogen that is spreading throughout the world has caused an unprecedented disruption of this dynamic: while we isolate our individual selves and observe an ever-increasing number of interactions gravitate toward one virtual presence or another, significant changes to urban environments come to a grinding halt. What kind of explicitly place-based pedagogy can develop during (or after) a protracted crisis is yet to be determined. We find comfort, even hope, in the upending of established urban routines and ways of doing things, and their replacement with actions that can be seen in many locations in the spring of 2020: from pop-up cycle lanes in Kreuzberg to the reduction of condoned speeds attached to private cars in Milan and Brussels, from the reclaiming of differently structured vacant sites by people living nearby to the invention of novel forms of solace. We believe that the city's future is much more "up for grabs" than we would have dared to think a year ago. Additionally, we believe there is great value in approaching these potential futures using assemblage-derived tools: if CoVid-19 has invited one realization relevant to work on "the urban," it must undoubtedly be the validation of "thinking outside the box" given the obvious validity of experimental modes of thinking and doing. Something would have been accomplished if the deconstruction of "participation" within the framework of a locally anchored, pedagogy-embracing urban lab described in this paper could contribute to the transformation of both Nuns' Island and Galway.