The Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) reports that in the last 15 years, the population within major metropolitan areas have grown faster than in other semiurban or rural areas worldwide. In tandem with soaring motorization, this rapid urbanisation has resulted in urban sprawls, increasing traffic congestion and longer commuting distances. These effects are not limited to negative impacts on mobility but also growing metropolitan areas have contributed to increased urban poverty, promoted the migration from rural to urban centres, and indirectly, these regions have enabled the establishment of informal settlements.
An exemplary case of uncontrolled metropolitan growth is Mexico City Metropolitan Area (MCMA); with one in six Mexicans iving in this region, it is the third-most populous metropolitan area within the OECD countries and the largest outside Asia. The MCMA transitioned from having 14 million inhabitants in 1980 to more than 21 million in 2017. That represents a population growth rate of 1.1%, far above the world average and notably above rates in Europe and the United States. Simultaneously, the urban growth rate was significantly higher at 3.3%, shifting from 61,820.37 ha in 1980 to 235,267,873 ha in 2017. Most of this growth entails informal settlements and peripherally-located commercial housing, where slum-dwellers have quickly transformed housing units into shops and local businesses. Although rapid urbanization has precipitated in the last decades, the MCMA has one of the longest histories of large-scale urbanization in the Americas.
Historically, urban poverty has a long and complex history, but in Mexico City it began due to topography and colonial land use. Low-income groups invaded steep hillsides, dried-up lake beds, and flood-prone areas, leading to the creation of informal settlements, commonly known as slums. Currently, in Mexico, 25 % of the urban population live in informal settlements, from which 60 % are considered poor or moderately poor and exhibit varying degrees of deprivation and social heterogeneity. Although informal settlements contribute to the upward mobility of the inhabitants, in Mexico city’s case, the majority still lack access to basic services, with Roy and colleagues qualifying this urban growth as ’highly unproductive, [one that] deepens inequality [and] raises pollution levels’. In order to prevent the expansion of informal settlements, authorities have implemented policies that range from relocation to resettlement colonies and in situ development slums to forced evictions.
Moreover, the MCMA is one of the largest metropolitan regions globally, and most of its inhabitants experience a ’double energy vulnerability.’ --circumstances whereby people are at an intensified risk of energy and transport poverty simultaneously, there is little research addressing these dynamics. Our study addresses this gap directly by delving into the housing, mobility, health and wellbeing of slum-dwellers in the MCMA. Based on an intensive and original mixed methods design involving extensive site visits to slums in MCMA’s locations, 51 household interviews and two focus groups with slum-dwellers, this study analyses slum-dwellers transport and mobility patterns, housing and energy needs, and quality of life. Our discussion focuses on three different areas of relevance to this journal: perpetual peripheralization (including cultural antagonism and intolerance), spatial justice (including instruments to enhance the quality of life and mobility and energy outcomes for marginalized groups living in this region) and extreme poverty and vulnerability (including notions resilience and coping).