So-called ‘‘slum-dwellers” living in informal settlements in Mexico City Metropolitan Area (MCMA) often confront poor health outcomes, face chronic accommodation insecurity and are frequent victims of social intolerance, discrimination and racism. In addition, they usually reside in living environments with precariously hazardous conditions that often lead to their well-being endangerment. Based on extensive original research with slum-dwellers from the MCMA including focus groups (N = 18 participants), household interviews (N = 51 participants), and site visits (N = 5), this study investigates their energy and housing needs, transport and mobility patterns and challenges to their overall quality of life and health. The MCMA is one of the largest metropolitan regions globally, and most of its inhabitants experience a ‘‘double energy vulnerability,” circumstances whereby people are at an intensified risk of energy and transport poverty simultaneously. Our investigation circles around three key themes. In exploring the subject of extreme poverty and vulnerability, we show not only the problems they confront but also illegal practices such as electricity thefts and coping strategies. In investigating the subject of perpetual peripheralization, we show troubling patterns of discrimination, racism and social intolerance. In exploring the subject of spatial justice, we suggest a set of policies that ought to help achieve it.
To explore the lived experience of energy and mobility poverty in Mexico’s informal settlements, we conducted two focus groups with 18 urban and rural participants, interviewed 51 households, and conducted site visits to five locations in the MCMA. Our research showed that most participants experience a ‘‘double energy vulnerability,” circumstances whereby people simultaneously face an intensified risk of energy and transport poverty. Moreover, we revealed that energy and transport poverty are exacerbated by peripheralization, marginalization and discrimination and that poverty experiences are not limited to affordability; instead, energy and transport poverty must be addressed through a multidimensional lens.
Slum-dwellers represent one of the most vulnerable groups in urban areas, and a particularly vulnerable class of people within the MCMA region. Through extensive field research and focus groups, our study has revealed how housing, transport and energy needs are vital to their lifestyles but also a leading cause of their most significant social struggles. Many slum-residents spend up to half of their income on mobility and energy services, but primarily on transport, often accounting as their main household expenditure. In other cases, our study indicated that due to the increasing energy prices, slum-dwellers had found themselves needing to cook with wood regardless of the harmful effects on health or had been pushed to steal electricity. Our research also showed how slum-dwellers often expose themselves to inadequate housing and poor service conditions that could often negatively affect their wellbeing. Such conditions range from being robbed or murdered using public transport to electrocuting themselves installing diablitos to steal electricity.
The continuous peripheralisation of slum-dwellers in the MCMA could help as an uncomfortable reminder that extreme poverty, racism and discrimination exists even in industrialised cities such as Mexico City. Even though the current government’s priority is ‘‘to help the poor”, such issues persist and unsurprisingly, rather than seeing an improvement in their living conditions, our respondents saw the opposite, more decadence, corruption, poverty, discrimination and worse services. This research could also help remind us that low-income groups have daily struggles to survive and are often victims of violence against them and corrupted practices that put at risk their subsistence. For these communities, energy, mobility, and environmental health are not merely services or luxuries; they are instrumental and core aspects of achieving better qualities of live for themselves, their indigenous groups, and their children.