This paper advances a comparative and macroscopic analysis of regional voting patterns in African countries. Using comparative and longitudinal data, and electoral geography methods little used in African studies, we document the existence of persistent regional electoral blocs in three countries that are often taken as exemplars of fluidity, rather than stability, in electoral voting patterns – Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi. We argue that the observed patterns are not well accounted for in existing theory, and that the discrepancies open the door to an alternative, and more encompassing, interpretation of structure and cleavage in electoral dynamics.
Most studies of electoral politics in African countries since the 1990s have been focused either on individual-level voter (or politician) behavior within localities, or on national-level political systems. The former has stressed the large extent to which ethnic identity predicts individual-level vote choice, and the latter has been concerned with low levels of party and party system institutionalization. The two literatures tend to converge around an emphasis on ethnicity as the main sociopolitical cleavage in most African countries, and to emphasize the weak institutionalization and shifting nature of electoral coalitions enabled by a lack of permanent political interests.
Departing from most existing work on African electoral politics, this paper shifts the analytic scale from the micro-level to the meso-level of regionally-clustered groups of electoral constituencies. We also shift the focus away from political parties themselves, and instead track geographic voting patterns in the electorate that persist independent of party labels. Using a spatial analysis of voting outcomes in presidential elections in Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi since 1990, we identify multiethnic regional voting blocs that persist across elections in each country. The analysis detects a structural feature of national voting that has not been highlighted in earlier work – a singular, geographically-defined line of regional cleavage between two main electoral blocs. Although the present paper does not test a causal theory of bloc etiology, we argue that the observed patterns of spatial clustering and cleavage are isomorphic to those identified by Lipset and Rokkan in their classic study of core-periphery oppositions that can emerge in the course of state building and national economic development. In Lipset & Rokkan’s theorization, territorial oppositions arise from spatial-sectoral competition, persistent regional economic and social inequalities, and regional tensions associated with processes of national economic integration. Our empirical results are consistent with such a reading for the three African countries we study. Dynamics of territorial opposition in these three countries exhibit strong and persistent lines of regional competition and cleavage between economically-leading, predominantly agricultural regions, or between dynamic export-producing regions and poorer peripheries. We offer descriptive empirics and short case histories to support this interpretation.
The main contribution of the paper is to connect the analysis of African elections to broader theories of regional cleavage in national politics. Economic geography, spatial economic inequalities, and regionalism arising from economic interests appear to contribute to the over-time structuration of electoral cleavage in these countries to a greater extent that previous theories of electoral dynamics have allowed. We show that the persistent patterns in electoral geography that we identify cannot be “read off” an underlying ethnic geography, or attributed at the regional and national levels to mechanisms associated with ethnic diversity or the retail politics of ethnic clientelism. 
As far as we know, this is the first spatial analysis of geographic voting patterns in African countries that combines electoral data both cross-nationally and over-time. We use electoral-geography methods and a new, georeferenced dataset on constituency-level electoral outcomes across 15 presidential elections to identify persistent regional voting blocs in each of three countries. Using these data, we develop new empirical strategies for identifying regional persistent voting blocs. To describe economic differentiation and inequality across the predominantly-rural voting blocs, we aggregate georeferenced survey data from nine country-year DHS survey rounds to the electoral constituency and electoral bloc level for all three countries. The surveys provide household and individual-level indicators of socioeconomic status, as well as self-reported ethnicity data. Nighttime luminosity data provide a proxy measure of regional levels of economic development. This empirical strategy allows us to map stable geographic voting patterns over persistent patterns of uneven economic development. The data provide support for linking electoral geography to economic geography, and interpreting the electoral cleavages we identify as expressions of regional tensions arising from uneven development. 
Part I situates the analysis with respect to past work on ethnicity and ethno-regionalism in African election studies, and advances an alternative understanding of electoral dynamics at the meso- and national levels. We frame an interpretation that takes persistent regional electoral blocs as the expression of territorial politics arising from regional economic differentiation. Part II uses electoral-geography methods and constituency-level electoral outcomes to identify the presence of persistent, regional voting blocs in each of three countries. Part III uses geocoded micro data to show that the persistent electoral blocs are multiethnic and regionally-cleaved in ways that are not fully accounted for in existing theories of ethnic clientelism. Part IV turns to political economy works on territorial politics to argue that electoral cleavages in Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi can be understood as expressions of coreperiphery oppositions that emerge in the course of national economic development. We build our case on descriptive statistics that capture regional economic differentiation and inequalities, and thumbnail case studies that track histories of regional oppositions in national politics. A supplementary Appendix contains details on data, method, and statistical results, as well as supplementary data analysis.