Do socio-economic cleavages shape electoral dynamics in African countries? Previous individual-level and party systems research on African politics has deemphasized socio-economic factors, contributing to the common view that ethnic cleavages and short-term ethnic alliances define politics both locally and nationally. Focusing on Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi, we draw on methods in electoral geography to offer a spatial analysis of geographic patterns in constituency-level electoral returns over three decades that reveals the existence of persistent regional voting blocs that, in their temporal stability and multiethnic character, are not well explained by prevailing theory. The anomalies open the door to a reinterpretation national electoral structure and dynamics in the three countries that takes the geographic clustering of the persistent voting blocs as a clue to their etiology. We propose an interpretation that focuses on core-periphery cleavages in national electorates, following Lipset and Rokkan’s (1967) classic model of territorial oppositions in countries undergoing political and economic integration and modernization. DHS data and proxies for regional economic activity support this interpretation. Socio-economic cleavages of the type explored in comparative political economy literatures on spatial inequality and territorial politics may be more salient in African electoral politics than previously thought.
We interpret the persistent electoral blocs we have identified using electoral geography methods as evidence of regional cleavage patterns in national electoral politics. Persistent electoral blocs map onto the uneven geography of regions, and onto the hierarchical positioning of these regions in terms of wealth, distribution of productive assets, productive capacity, and sectoral divisions of labor within national economies. Territorial politics and regional tensions may and do co-exist with micro-level ethnic clientelism and meso-level patronage politics to build electoral coalitions. In this sense, our analysis encompasses much of what is emphasized in earlier work. Yet our analysis offers an alternative theorization of structure in national voting patterns that is more consistent with the spatial clustering patterns observed in our constituency-level data than a great deal of existing theory, which identifies culturo-ethnic identity and non-economic issues as the basic sources of cleavage in national politics.
Observed patterns of bloc persistence and coalescing in presidential elections in Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi suggest that sectional economic interests and regional competition may be more politically-salient in these countries than much existing work has implied. Looking beyond the three countries featured here, the generally high levels of spatial inequality and strong patterns of regional economic differentiation characteristic of most African countries should lead us to expect that regional cleavages will be politically salient in most of them, even if the salience of regional cleavages varies cross-nationally.
Our research suggests that robust theories of cohesive political action in African countries may require analysis of the geographic overlapping of regional socio-economic differentiation, collective identities, and political organization. Politically-salient ethnic identities in Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi often coincide with, and indeed may themselves coalesce around, cleavages rooted in economic geography and regional interests. This seems clearest for “composite” ethnic identities that have coalesced in the course of competition against other regional groups in the national political arena, such as Kalenjin, Luyha, Bemba, and Chewa. This logic would lead us to expect that such ethnic identities are themselves a result of strategic coalition-building across groups with shared, regionally-defined political projects and interests.51 If correct, we would expect to see in most African countries the kind of persistent, regional, multi-ethnic electoral blocs that our analysis has identified.