Do socio-economic divisions affect electoral trends in African nations? Socioeconomic factors were underemphasized in earlier individual-level and party-system studies of African politics, which contributed to the widespread belief that ethnic divisions and transient ethnic alliances determine politics both locally and nationally. We focus on Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi and use electoral geography techniques to provide a spatial analysis of geographic patterns in constituency-level electoral returns over a period of thirty years that reveals the existence of enduring regional voting blocs that, due to their temporal stability and multiethnic nature, are not well explained by prevailing theory. The anomalies allow for a new interpretation of the national electoral dynamics and structures in the three countries, one that uses the geographic concentration of the persistent voting blocs as an etiological indicator. We suggest an interpretation that emphasizes core-periphery cleavages in national electorates, based on the traditional model of territorial oppositions proposed by Lipset and Rokkan (1967) for nations undergoing political and economic integration and modernization. This interpretation is supported by DHS data and proxies for regional economic activity. Contrary to earlier speculation, socio-economic divisions of the kind discussed in comparative political economy literatures on territorial politics and spatial inequality may be more prominent in African electoral politics. Inferring regional cleavage patterns in national electoral politics from the persistent electoral blocs we have discovered using electoral geography methods. Persistent electoral blocs are related to regional inequality in terms of geography, wealth distribution, productive capacity, and sectoral labor divisions within national economies, as well as to the hierarchical positioning of these regions. Regional conflicts, territorial politics, and meso- and micro-level patronage politics can all coexist while forming electoral coalitions. In this way, our analysis incorporates a lot of the points made in earlier work. Although a lot of existing theory identifies culturo-ethnic identity and non-economic issues as the primary sources of cleavage in national politics, our analysis offers an alternative theorization of structure in national voting patterns that is more consistent with the spatial clustering patterns seen in our constituency-level data. Regional competition and sectional economic interests may be more politically salient in Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi than much previous research has suggested, according to observed patterns of bloc persistence and coalescing in presidential elections in these countries. We should anticipate that regional cleavages will be politically salient in most African countries, even if the salience of regional cleavages varies cross-nationally, given the generally high levels of spatial inequality and strong patterns of regional economic differentiation that are typical of most African countries. Considering the geographic overlap of regional socioeconomic differentiation, group identities, and political organization may be necessary for developing robust theories of cohesive political action in African nations, according to our research. In Kenya, Zambia, and Malawi, politically significant ethnic identities frequently coincide with, and in fact may even coalesce around, cleavages rooted in economic geography and regional interests. The "composite" ethnic identities of the Kalenjin, Luyha, Bemba, and Chewa peoples, which have come together as a result of competition with other regional groups in the national political sphere, seem to illustrate this the best. According to this logic, we should anticipate that these ethnic identities themselves are a result of carefully forming alliances between groups that have similar, regionally-defined political projects and interests. 51 If accurate, we would anticipate seeing the kind of enduring, regional, multi-ethnic electoral blocs that our analysis has identified in the majority of African countries.