“Hear us, we desire to live. Prolonged drought is depriving us of the fruits of our toil; Low water supply means hunger and thirst for most of us; El Nino continues to threaten our relationship with one another. O Lord, this is a very hostile phenomenon that we beg for You to end. At this time of looming catastrophe, dear Lord, dwell in our hearts.”
Over 2018 and 2019, a lengthy El Nino drought unfolded in the Philippines and disrupted regular patterns of rainfall across the archipelago. While by no means the most serious event in recent history, especially relative to the particularly disastrous 1997/8 El Nino, the length and impact of the drought on the capital of Manila meant that the event received disproportionate attention from politicians and national media. The state of calamity was deemed so severe that the Archbishop of Cebu issued an Oratio Imperata, or obligatory prayer, that implored Church-goers at Sunday mass to request that God “Shower us with rain, provide us with water that we need.”, in what has become a traditional part of contemporary mass during El Nino events in the Philippines. This moment is important, as it not only highlights the significance of climate and climate change in Philippine society but emphasises that “climate” is understood and acted on in many nations beyond Euro-American political and scientific rationalities that a scientific and progressive left against a retrograde right-wing and populist movements that thrive on climate change denial. And what heightens the significance of this particular El Nino event is that it took place during the administration of the populist President Rodrigo Duterte, elected in 2016, whose responses to the ensuing water crisis seamlessly blended with the president’s violent and authoritarian techniques of government.
Researchers concerned with quantifying experiences of vulnerability and practices of adaptation, at a national level, often cast the Philippines as one of the world’s most vulnerable nations to climate change and extreme weather events. The negative impacts of severe typhoons and droughts are devastating and routine features of daily life that cuts, albeit unevenly, across class divides to devastate entire cities or regions. In response, the Philippine state has developed over the last two decades perhaps the world’s most comprehensive climate change response policy infrastructure. Drawing on the international language of climate change governance, government policy now emphasises risk reduction, the devolution of adaptation to local governments and an all-of-government focus on climate change as an existential risk. At the same time, climate change has also increasingly become the concern of the nation’s highly personalised, combative and often violent electoral politics, as would-be presidents jostle over who would be most able to provide effective relief during catastrophic storms or secure a comfortable life in the context of increasing environmental stress on water and food supplies for the precarious poor. As this paper charts, the Philippines has become a society and government-oriented, with staggering comprehensiveness (and contested efficacy), to the management of climate change impacts in the form of conjoined and globally-distinct disaster relief practices, risk reduction efforts and adaptation policies. This comprehensive political and societal response in places like the Philippines should be of foremost concern to scholars concerned with understanding the plurality of adaptation futures that might guide governmental response to climate change, and with what effect.
Recent critical scholarship on climate justice has emphasised the need for wider ontological inclusivity in the formation of adaptation schemes and visions that look beyond Western traditions to, for example, fully account for the uneven impacts of environmental change beyond universalist political philosophies. Scholars have therefore increasingly looked to the experiences of peoples most violently impacted by climate change, yet rarely “take seriously” experiences from places like the Philippines nor the actions of powerful but ethically unsavoury actors such as Duterte who challenge both liberal-humanist norms of climate action and ascendant posthumanist critiques. This paper describes an increasingly prevalent alternative adaptation future: the “violent adaptation” to climate change of the Duterte administration. I do so by examining the Philippine state’s responses to the 2018–2019 El Nino event. Before Duterte’s election, successive presidential administrations in the Philippines have enthusiastically embraced the global governance of climate change through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and other multilateral arrangements to facilitate national adaptation and support mitigation efforts. However, in 2016 the nation elected the internationally controversial and provocative populist Rodrigo Duterte in what the Philippine national media and foreign commentators saw as a harsh rebuke, proximately, of the liberalism of the previous Benigno Aquino III administration and ultimately of the social and economic failures of the post-Marcos era. In contrast to the Aquino government’s overt embrace of multilateralism and neoliberalism as the path to prosperity, Duterte has sought to personally champion adaptation to climate change, exemplified in his responses to the 2018–2019 El Nino, through a jarring combination of practices: exhorting the devastating reality of climate change for developing nations; denigrating multilateral mitigation efforts as colonial injustices; subverting indigenous peoples’ land rights; and fostering extrajudicial assassination of activists opposed to water securitization projects.
While popular media critiques of Duterte often frame him as a disguised neoliberal or freakish aberration, I build on a growing body of scholarly work focused on authoritarianism and the environment to suggest that his climate change policies instead reference a culturally specific populism and must be understood in the larger historical relationship between climate, government and politics in the Philippines that will endure beyond his term. I argue that there is a need to examine actually existing, and increasingly prevalent, “violent adaptations” as a global trajectory that blends extrajudiciality, political cronyism and nationalism in responding to climate change. To do so, this paper first explores recent developments in the critical literature surrounding adaptation to climate change. I then chart the historical blending of politics and climate governance in the Philippines, in the form of disaster response and climate change policies, which have rapidly thickened over the past twenty years. Finally, I examine the recent responses of the Duterte administration, particularly Duterte’s extralegislative actions, to the recent 2018–2019 El-Nino-driven water crisis as a concrete and confronting example of adaptation to climate change.
Methodologically, this paper relies on the analysis of secondary resources in place of, ideally, ethnographic work given the risks associated with inquiry regarding politics and rural development in the Philippines for both researchers and their participants. As such, the paper augments a close examination of the existing historical and policy literature surrounding climate and climate change governance in the Philippines with a review of: the Philippine news media focused on the Duterte’s administration, spanning climate change and the Kaliwa Dam project and as well the Philippine and international media coverage of climate change policies and responses by previous administrations since the early 2000s; and, the policy documentation from key state organisations relevant to the Kaliwa Dam project (e.g., MWSS and NCIP) since Duterte’s election in 2016. The paper also draws on a comprehensive and geolocated database of extrajudicial killings of environmental defenders in the Philippines, created as part of a larger project and used here for contextual data.