By analyzing the climate change strategy of the populist Philippine president Rodrigo Duterte, this essay examines the concept of the limits of adaptation in global environmental governance and advocacy. I show how the Duterte administration has pursued a violent vision of climate adaptation by focusing on disparate state responses to the 2018–2019 El Nino drought. This includes exhorting the devastating reality of climate change, criticizing multilateral mitigation efforts as colonial injustices, undermining indigenous peoples' land rights, and encouraging the extrajudicial assassination of activists. I contend that recent responses to climate change in the Philippines, which combine nationalist and anti-colonial sentiments with confrontational forms of illiberalism, should be examined as part of the larger unfolding of illiberal adaptation politics throughout Philippine history and the Global South, even though Duterte's larger climate change policies are frequently seen as a tactical diversion or the isolated product of an erratic populist. These politics challenge both universalist Western political rationales and new climate justice movement directions that demand ontological inclusivity due to their significant (though far from total) local resonance. I draw attention to the need for a more thorough investigation of the causes, behaviors, and effects of violent adaptations. The need to adapt to climate change no longer just means following a clearly defined set of procedures. The term is now used by both practitioners and scholars in increasingly diffuse, overlapping, and even contradictory ways, in contrast to earlier literature's attempt to map precise definitions, frequently using the language and logic of systems thinking. Consequently, it has become difficult to recognize the variety of these formations and comprehend their political impact. This essay sought to examine the adaptive practices of the Duterte administration and the Philippine climate bureaucracy, two symbiotic components of a heterogeneous state response. It also sought to situate these recent responses within a longer historical context where politics and climate governance - in the form of knowledge production projects, disaster relief efforts, and risk reduction strategies - are closely intertwined. Over the past 20 years, as the Philippine nation and its leaders struggle with the staggering costs of recurring climate disasters, this blending has become a more noticeable aspect of daily life and routine politics, manifesting in what I have termed here "violent adaptations." Instead of codifying violent adaptations as a desirable or hopeful pathway, a focus on these adaptations should highlight the importance of two types of work that must be done to understand how they function. The first involves tracing their historical development, behavior, and varying effects. Experiences in the Philippines, where populist leaders explicitly reject colonialism and genuinely aim to "adapt," not only accept but also use climate change to strengthen personal power, continue to stand out on a global scale. This combination is probably the result of the harsh, everyday climate vulnerabilities of the country, which make denialism electorally unviable. But as populist tendencies in other countries are exposed by anthropogenic climate change, I contend that illiberal responses will present a viable alternative to both the established liberal-humanist climate governance of multilateral institutions and the outlandish ideas of modern climate adaptation researchers (Smith and Dressler, 2019) This possibility should continue to be of great concern to the academic allies of the climate justice movement as hybridized authoritarian populism is still, if not ascendant, then at least resolutely persistent around the world. This is especially true in much of the Global South, where climate change is already having devastating effects. Given the growing concern to securitize life in the face of climate extremes and in places where extrajudicial violence is already deployed and normalized in populist terms, there is a threat that violent adaptations will become routine. Examples of key locations where violence is increasingly seeping into routine religious and ethnic conflict, agrarian change, and other areas of contestation are Modi's India, Indonesia's subnational politics, and a large portion of the rest of Southeast Asia. Duterte is frequently portrayed as an exceptional aberration in the Philippines, whose unique methods of governance will end when he leaves office. However, as this essay has shown, since the colonial era, the Philippine government's approach to managing disasters and climate change has consistently emphasized the blurring of political power and adaptation. Finding recent aspects of climate change governance in these histories also suggests that what appear to be ephemeral or outrageous aspects of Duterte's administration—the intertwining of personal favoritism and disaster relief, extrajudicial and militarized violence against environmental activists—are arguably institutionalized aspects of Philippine politics and have been for a significant portion of time since the highly controlled electoral politics experiments of the 1990s (Rafael, 2021) Additionally, Duterte has retained his popularity throughout his term frequently due to, not in spite of, his illiberal actions. Even though not everyone agrees with Duterte's policies, and they have occasionally provoked loud protest, he is still one of the most well-liked Philippine presidents. Duterte had a personal approval rating of 65% at the end of 2021 despite the COVID-19 pandemic's ongoing effects; this rating frequently exceeded 75% for much of his six-year term. As a counterbalance to the sclerotic climate bureaucracy, this popularity reveals a significant (though hardly uncontested) and long-standing public appetite for violent adaptation. As a matter of fact, the perceived ineffectiveness of formal institutional responses may increase public support for national or regional political leaders who straddle the line between legal and extrajudicial action in order to produce noticeable results. Sara Duterte-Caprio and Ferdinand Marcos Jr. were elected in 2022, which was a crushing affirmation of Duterte's presidency, manner of governance, and public acceptance of extrajudicial violence. There is little hope that Marcos' administration will significantly reverse or repudiate in any way the entrenched violence surrounding the Kaliwa Dam and other crucial projects that explicitly seek to secure life and economic prosperity in the face of climate change, even though his goals on the issue remain hazy. Second, paying attention to examples of diverse adaptations that are already in place, such as those in the Philippines where a sizable bureaucracy coexists with violent extrajudicial power, invites critical consideration of a variety of unsettling and ontologically diverse adaptation futures. This discussion of violent adaptations also refutes a central claim of recent critical literature, which has argued for ontological inclusivity and the need to respect alternative perspectives on climate change and its effects. Drawing attention to violent adaptations in particular undermines recent and compelling arguments for the widespread valorization of ontological multiplicity within communities of adaptation researchers and beyond in the climate justice movement (often without actually engaging the perspectives of such peoples) Political ecologists have called for clear distinctions between, for instance, the ontologies of oil companies and those of indigenous or marginalized peoples in response to similar challenges surrounding post-truth politics (Neimark et al., 2019) However, populists like Duterte strategically appropriate and refashion various forms of agrarian angst or decolonial sentiment in the service of violence. This happens in the Philippines and many other places where the worldviews of autocratic leaders and the marginalized groups collide in unsettling ways. In the burgeoning literature on climate justice, these kinds of situations raise challenging questions, such as which decolonial climate justice visions are respectable and how and by whom such decisions ought to be made. Undoubtedly, primarily Western-based or trained scholars put in a lot of intellectual work to compile a highly curated list of suitable visions of climate change that interact with social movements interested in climate justice. Although I am invested in and in favor of this process, I also balance my support with the belief that it is risky given the frankly limited resonance of these ideas in large portions of the non-Western world, where authoritarian forms of populism are popular. The unsettling fact that those most affected by climate change and least involved in decisions about adaptation or mitigation, the targeted beneficiaries of climate justice movements and critical adaptation studies (Newell et al., 2021) may support violent adaptation points to the need for developing strategies for engaging with rather than ignoring such groups and adopting a more nuanced language that catalogues unsettling difference without necessarily endorsing either.