This paper considers the limits of adaptation as a concept in global environmental governance and advocacy by examining the climate change policy of the populist Philippine president Rodrigo Duterte. By focusing on heterogenous state responses to the 2018–2019 El Nino ˜ drought, I demonstrate how the Duterte administration has worked to achieve a violent vision of climate adaptation through a jarring combination of practices: exhorting the devastating reality of climate change; denigrating multilateral mitigation efforts as colonial injustices; subverting indigenous peoples’ land rights; and fostering the extrajudicial assassination of activists. Though Duterte’s wider climate change policies are often viewed as a strategic distraction or the isolated product of an erratic populist, I argue that these recent responses to climate change in the Philippines, which fuse decolonial and nationalist sensibilities to confrontational forms of illiberalism, should be examined as part of the larger unfurling of illiberal adaptation politics across Philippine history and the Global South. These politics, and their considerable (though far from total) local resonance, challenge both universalist Western political rationalities and new directions in climate justice movement calling for ontological inclusivity. I highlight the need for a closer examination of the origins, practices and implications of violent adaptions.
The imperative to adapt to climate change has no longer come to refer to a readily identifiable set of practices. While earlier literature sought to map precise definitions, often through the language and logic of systems thinking, the term is now deployed by both practitioners and scholars in increasingly diffuse, overlapping and even contradictory ways. The challenge, therefore, has become identifying the multiplicity of these formations and understanding their political effect. This paper has aimed to explore the adaptive practices of the Philippine climate bureaucracy and the Duterte administration, two symbiotic elements of a heterogenous state response, and positioned these recent responses within a longer history in which climate governance – in form of knowledge production projects, disaster relief efforts and risk reduction strategies – and politics are tightly bound together. This blending has increasingly become a visible feature of everyday life and routine politics over the past 20 years as the Philippine nation and its leaders grapple with the staggering costs of recurring climate disasters, manifesting in what I have termed here “violent adaptations”. The aim of focusing on violent adaptations should not be to codify them as a desired or hopeful pathway but to emphasise that there are two forms of vital work to be done surrounding their operation.
The first lies in charting their origins, practices and differential impacts. Experiences in the Philippines, in which populist leaders not only accept but leverage climate change in ways that reinforce personal power, are explicitly decolonial and have genuine “adaptive” intent, remain relatively unique on the global stage. This combination is likely a product of the brutal and routine realities of the nation’s climate vulnerabilities that render denialism electorally unviable. Yet, as anthropogenic climate change becomes manifest in other nations that flirt with populism, I suggest that illiberal responses will become an increasingly viable adaptation future, presenting an alternative to both the established liberal-humanist climate governance of the multilateral institutions or the radical propositions of contemporary climate adaptation researchers (Smith and Dressler, 2019). This possibility should remain a key concern for the climate justice movement and its academic allies as hybridized authoritarian populism remains, if not in ascendance, powerfully stubborn across the globe. This is particularly true in much of the Global South already experiencing the shattering impacts of climate change. There is a threat of violent adaptations being routinized given the growing anxiety to securitize life in the face of climate extremes and in places where extrajudicial violence is already deployed and normalized in populist terms. Modi’s India, for example, Indonesia’s subnational politics, and much of the rest of Southeast Asia are all key sites where violence is increasingly creeping into routine religious and ethnic conflict, agrarian change and other realms of contestation.
In the Philippines itself, Duterte is often cast as an exceptional aberration, whose distinct techniques of government will end with his term. Yet, as this paper has described, the blurring of adaptation and political power has been a key feature of Philippine climate change and disaster management policy, in varied and changing forms, since the colonial period. Locating recent characteristics of climate change governance in these histories also suggests that seemingly ephemeral or outrageous characteristics of Duterte’s administration – the inseparability of personal patronage and disaster response, extrajudicial and militarized violence against environmental defenders – are arguably institutionalised features of Philippine politics, and have been in large part since the highly controlled experiments with electoral politics of the commonwealth period (Rafael, 2021). Furthermore, Duterte has also enjoyed enduring popularity over his term often because of, not in spite of, his illiberal actions. While Duterte’s policies are by no means universally supported and have at times sparked considerable protest, he remains one of the most popular Philippine presidents. At the end of 2021, amid the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, Duterte enjoyed a personal approval rating of 65%, a rating that often exceeded 75% for much of his six-year term. This popularity indicates a significant (though hardly uncontested) and longstanding public appetite for violent adaptation that exists as a foil to the sclerotic climate bureaucracy. Indeed, the perceived failure of formal institutional responses may vest further public support in national or regional political leaders who blur the line between legal and extrajudicial action to provide tangible results. At the time of this paper’s writing in 2022, Ferdinand Marcos Jnr and Sara Duterte-Caprio were elected in what was a crushingly affirmation of Duterte’s presidency, style of government and public tolerance for extrajudicial violence. While Marcos’ climate change goals remain nebulous, there is little expectation that his administration will significantly reverse or repudiate in any fashion the now-entrenched violence surrounding the Kaliwa Dam and other critical projects that seek to explicitly secure life and economic prosperity in the face of climate change.
Secondly, taking seriously actually existing examples of diverse adaptations, such as those in the Philippines in which a vast bureaucracy operates symbiotically with violent extrajudicial power, opens critical attention to a plurality of uncomfortable and ontologically diverse adaptation futures This engagement with violent adaptations also challenges a core charge of recent critical literature that has argued for ontological inclusivity and the need for greater respect for alternative ways of knowing and responding to climate change. In particular, calling attention to violent adaptations troubles recent and powerful arguments within researcher communities focused on adaptation, and beyond in the climate justice movement, for the blanket valorisation of ontological multiplicity (often without actually engaging the perspectives of such peoples). Political ecologists have responded to similar challenges around post-truth politics by calling for sharp distinctions between, for example, the ontologies of oil companies and those of indigenous or marginalised peoples (Neimark et al., 2019). Yet, in the Philippines and many other places, the worldviews of autocratic leaders and the marginalised groups intermingle in unsettling ways as populists such as Duterte tactically appropriate and refashion various forms of agrarian angst or decolonial sentiment in the service of violence.
These kinds of situations raise difficult questions within the burgeoning literature on climate justice: what visions of decolonial climate justice are worthy of respect, and how and by whom should such decisions be made? Undeniably, primarily Western-based or trained scholars perform considerable intellectual labour to create a highly selective list of appropriate climate change visions that operate in conversation with social movements concerned with climate justice. While I am invested and supportive in this process, I also balance my advocacy with the conclusion it is dangerous given the frankly limited resonance of these ideas in significant swaths of the non-Western world where authoritarian forms of populism enjoy considerable support. The uncomfortable reality that the targeted beneficiaries of climate justice movements and critical adaptation studies, those most impacted by climate change and least involved in decisions around adaptation or mitigation (Newell et al., 2021), might support violence-tinged adaptation indicates a need to develop strategies for reaching out to, rather than ignoring, such groups and adopt a more nuanced language that catalogue unsettling difference without necessarily endorsing or valorising it.