From the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, news coverage and policymaking have prominently featured concerns that government-mandated restrictions on economic activity and personal mobility might increase domestic violence (DV).1 This attention to DV is well-motivated because of its high social and economic costs (Garcia- Moreno & Watts, 2011) and because stress, economic disruption, and social isolation are established predictors of DV (Berg & Tertilt, 2012; Bright et al., 2020). Nevertheless, shutdowns were unprecedented, and they could reduce DV in some households by lowering exposure to DV triggers such as infidelity and alcohol consumption outside the home (Nemeth et al., 2012), limiting contact between non-cohabiting and former couples (Ivandic et al., 2020), and even strengthening some relationships (Sachser et al., 2021). Furthermore, increased public and private funding to support DV victims and survivors, together with in- creased media attention devoted to DV, around the time shutdowns were imposed (Bright et al., 2020) could have reduced repeated violence and escalation. Federal stimulus payments enacted in response to the pandemic also significantly lowered poverty rates, which may have reduced DV (Wheaton et al., 2021; Erten et al., 2022). As a result of these opposing factors, the effects of shutdowns on overall DV levels were theoretically ambiguous and likely to vary across populations.

Determining the overall impact of shutdowns on DV requires careful empirical analysis, but results need to be produced and disseminated rapidly to contribute to ongoing debates about pandemic policy (Single Gonzalez et al., 2020). Because of this urgency, researchers from a variety of disciplines relied on readily available administrative data to assess DV incidence. In the US, the main source has been real-time data published by individual police departments that provide one or two key measures of DV: calls for service (911 calls or radio dispatches) and criminal incident reports. Despite the initial set of papers yielding mixed results, the claim that shutdowns increase DV incidence has been presented as an established fact in media coverage and in political debates about pandemic restrictions (e.g., Biggs, 2020).

This paper is motivated by the observation that the empirical studies finding increases in DV in US cities examine DV service calls as their exclusive (Leslie & Wilson, 2020; McCrary & Sanga, 2021; Nix & Richards, 2021) or primary (Hsu & Henke, 2021) outcome measure. While service call volume measures demand for police resources, it is a limited proxy for rates of specific crimes because “callers can be mistaken in what they report” (Ashby, 2020b; p. 1061) and “not all domestic violence calls are for activities that constitute crimes” (Klein, 2009; p. 1). Papers that examine DV crime rates are more likely to find decreases in DV, particularly when they account for seasonal variation using data from prior years (Abrams, 2021; Ashby, 2020a; Bullinger et al., 2021; Miller et al., 2020).2 However, because studies of the different police outcomes have differed in their geographic coverage, it is unclear if the divergence in estimates comes from systematic differences between the two types of police data or from geographic variation in the impact of shutdowns.

We address this important question by studying the 18 large, urban US police departments, serving over 14 million people, for which we were able to obtain incident-level data on both DV calls for service and DV assault crimes. We empirically estimate the impacts of shutdowns by comparing the differences in changes in each of our outcomes between the initial pandemic shutdown period in 2020 and the earlier part of the year and the changes between the same time periods in 2019. We find a decrease in DV assaults but an increase in DV calls during shutdowns. We also estimate models that account for the finding in the prior literature of an increase in DV calls during the period of voluntarily lower mobility that followed the nationwide emergency declaration but pre-ceded mandated shutdowns (e.g., McCrary & Sanga, 2021). When we estimate models that also control for the pre-shutdown emergency period, we find both DV assault crimes and DV calls are lower during shutdowns, relative to the immediately preceding period. We also find no evidence that intimate partner homicides or reports of intimate partner violence in the National Crime Victimization Survey increased during shutdown months; suicides, which have been linked to DV (Stevenson & Wolfers, 2006), were lower. These results fail to provide empirical support for claims that DV increased because of pandemic shutdowns, and instead suggest that violence may have decreased.