Despite enthusiasm around applications of information and communications technologies (ICTs) to smallholder agriculture in many lower-income countries, there are still many questions on the effectiveness of ICT-based approaches. This study assesses the impacts of video-mediated agricultural extension service provision on farmers’ adoption of improved agricultural technologies and practices in Ethiopia using data from a two-year randomized experiment. Our results show that the video-mediated extension approach significantly increases uptake of recommended technologies and practices by improving extension access and farmer knowledge. Specifically, we find that video-mediated extension reaches a wider audience than the government’s conventional extension approach and leads to higher levels of farmer understanding and uptake of the subject technologies in those locations randomly assigned to the program. While our results also point to greater extension access and greater knowledge among female spouses in locations where both male and female spouses were targeted by the program, we do not find clear evidence that a more inclusive approach translates into higher uptake of the subject technologies.
This study assess whether video-mediated agricultural extension leads to increased and sustained uptake of agricultural technologies and practices by smallholder farmers. We explore this question in the context of a large-scale experimental rollout of a videomediated extension approach by the Government of Ethiopia and Digital Green over a two-year period (the main production seasons in 2017/18 and 2018/19) in 347 kebeles across the four main regions. Based on a sample of 2345 households, we find that video-mediated extension approach led to increases in the uptake of key agricultural technologies and practices by farmers. Specifically, we find a 6-percentage point overall increase in farmers’ uptake of the recommended technologies in the first year of the experiment, which translates into a 10 percent increase over the mean of the control group. Across technologies, we find that the video-mediated approach resulted in a 13, 20 and 15 percent increase in uptake over control group means for row planting, precise seeding rate, and urea top/side dressing, respectively. These results endure in the second year of the experiment, indicating farmers’ effective adoption of the technologies beyond a mere trial in one production season.
We also study whether video-mediated extension targeted at both spouses of a household is more effective than when only targeted at the (typically male) household head. While the results point to greater participation and greater agricultural knowledge of spouses who also received the video-mediated extension, we do not find clear evidence that targeting both spouses translated into higher uptake of technologies. Likewise, we do not find clear evidence that the increased adoption of the technologies promoted by the Ethiopian public extension system translated into higher yields. These null yield results may be related to issues of measurement error, insufficient adaptation of the technologies to context, limited investment in complementary inputs or other factors.
Looking at the mechanisms that explain the effects of the approach on adoption of technologies, we find that the videomediated extension approach led to an increase in extension reach, with a 35 percent increase in farmers’ attendance at extension sessions, likely due to increased interest by farmers in the medium. In turn, we find a higher level of knowledge—greater technical understanding of the subject technologies and practices—among farmers in kebeles randomly assigned to the video-mediated extension approach.
However, these results come with one caveat: as for any new intervention, we are at this stage unable to assess whether our results are driven by the main features of the Digital Green approach, or by its novelty which may partly drive the observed higher participation of farmers to extension groups, and higher dissemination efforts by DAs. While our study covers two consecutive agricultural seasons, the long-term effect of such interventions remain open to further studies.