The use of information and communications technologies (ICTs) to address a wide array of development issues has gained considerable attention among governments, practitioners, and researchers in recent years.
Chong and Ferrara and Jensen and Oster demonstrate that exposure to TV soap operas featuring strong women and smaller families led to reduced fertility and increased women’s autonomy. 
Berg and Zia and Banerjee et al. rely on videos purposefully designed to convey specific messages on issues such as financial literacy or HIV prevention.
We explore these questions in the context of a large-scale rollout of a video-mediated extension approach by the Government of Ethiopia and Digital Green over a two-year period.
To the best of our knowledge, few studies have sought to measure the effectiveness of videos in promoting agricultural technologies with any degree of rigor or at any sizeable scale (see periodic reviews by Spielman et al., Fabregas et al., Nakasone and Torero, and Aker). 
Vasilaky et al. assessed the effectiveness of a video-mediated approach to promoting the system of rice intensification (SRI) among smallholder farmers in Bihar, India, and found that the approach increased the probability of adoption by 5 percentage points among those who viewed videos, which translated to a 50 percent increase over the mean of their control group.
Hörner et al. assessed the effect of decentralized agricultural extension services and a video intervention on the adoption of integrated soil fertility management in Ethiopia; but found no marginal gains in adoption resulting from the video intervention. 
Van Campenhout et al. experimented with video-based agricultural extension in Uganda and found significant effects on maize farmers’ knowledge, input use, and technology adoption. Dzanku et al. found significant effects for an intervention combining video documentaries and radio listening clubs on the uptake of rhizobium inoculation and legume yields in Ghana but were unable to disentangle the effect of the two interventions.
Further, our study explores both learning externalities and dis-adoption dynamics by virtue of its multi-year duration, similar to Oyinbo et al., who also studied the sustained impact of site-specific nutrient management recommendations provided through digital support tools in Nigeria.
 Exceptions include the use of short message services containing information on crop management advice and weather forecasts in India; integrated pest management practices in Ecuador; agronomic advice in India and Kenya; radio and mobile phone services to promote certified seeds and fertilizer in Senegal; animated videos on post-harvest management in Burkina Faso; insecticidal neem use in Benin; interactive crop advisory services via mobile phones in India; targeted/site-specific nutrient management recommendations through digital support tools in Nigeria and Ethiopia; and the video-based interventions noted earlier. Results from these studies vary from no effects of the ICT-based approach on technology adoption, production, or yields to significant changes in input and technology use and yields/profits, suggesting the importance of replication to appropriately reflect the context specificity of each intervention.
In the first year of the experiment, we find a 6 percentage points overall increase in farmers’ uptake of the recommended technologies, which translates into a 10 percent increase over the mean of the control group. 