Despite the excitement surrounding ICTs' applications to smallholder agriculture in many low-income nations, there are still many uncertainties regarding the efficacy of ICT-based strategies. Using data from a two-year randomized experiment, this study evaluates the effects of video-mediated agricultural extension service provision on farmers' adoption of improved agricultural technologies and practices in Ethiopia. Our findings demonstrate that by enhancing extension access and farmer knowledge, the video-mediated extension approach significantly increases uptake of advised technologies and practices. We specifically find that in those locations randomly assigned to the program, video-mediated extension reaches a wider audience than the government's traditional extension approach and increases farmer understanding and uptake of the relevant technologies. In areas where both male and female spouses were targeted by the program, our results also point to greater extension access and greater knowledge among female spouses; however, we do not find convincing evidence that a more inclusive approach results in higher uptake of the relevant technologies. This study examines whether video-mediated agricultural extension encourages smallholder farmers to adopt more agricultural practices and technologies. We investigate this issue in relation to the Government of Ethiopia and Digital Green's extensive experimental rollout of a videomediated extension strategy over a two-year period (the primary production seasons in 2017/18 and 2018/19) in 347 kebeles across the four major regions. Based on a sample of 2345 households, we discover that the use of video-mediated extension methods increased farmers' adoption of important agricultural technologies and practices. In the first year of the experiment, we discover a 6-percentage point overall increase in farmers' adoption of the advised technologies, which equates to a 10% increase over the mean of the control group. Across all technologies, we discover that the video-mediated approach increased uptake for row planting, precise seeding rate, and urea top/side dressing by 13, 20, and 15%, respectively, in comparison to control group means. The fact that these results are still valid in the second year of the experiment shows that farmers have adopted the technologies effectively, going beyond a simple trial during one production season. We also investigate whether targeting a video-mediated extension to a household's two spouses is more effective than targeting it only to the (typically male) household head. While the results indicate that spouses who also received the video-mediated extension were more engaged and knowledgeable about agriculture, there isn't any conclusive proof that targeting both spouses resulted in higher technology adoption. The increased use of the technologies pushed by Ethiopia's public extension system did not appear to increase yields, either, as far as we can tell. These "null yield" results could be attributed to problems with measurement error, inadequate technology context adaptation, insufficient investment in complementary inputs, or other factors. Looking at the mechanisms that explain how the approach affects technology adoption, we discover that the videomediated extension approach increased extension reach and resulted in a 35 percent rise in farmer attendance at extension sessions, probably as a result of farmers' growing interest in the medium. In response, we discover that farmers in kebeles randomly assigned to the video-mediated extension approach have a higher level of knowledge—a greater technical understanding of the relevant technologies and practices. The novelty of the Digital Green approach may partially explain the observed higher participation of farmers in extension groups and the increased efforts by DAs to disseminate information, as with any new intervention, we are currently unable to determine whether our results are driven by its main features or not. Even though our study only looked at two consecutive agricultural seasons, future research is still needed to determine the long-term effects of such interventions.