Growing urbanization, climate change, neo-liberal globalization, states incremental disengagement from the welfare state coupled with limited accessibility to the available urban assets and the rise of populism are some of the key reasons behind the propagation of new urban movements aimed at safeguarding the endangered commons. Urban commoning employing the Lefebvrian “right to the city” framework proliferated since the 1960s. Experimentations and practices of urban commoning took different forms amongst others: community gardens; urban farming; limited equity cooperatives; land trusts ; living labs, city-making, fablabs and Peer to Peer production as well as exclusionary commons such as gated communities and privatized public spaces.
Different stakeholders and actors such as: individuals, nonprofit organizations, citymakers, social and cultural entrepreneurs, impact private businesses, civil society organizations, neighbourhood committees, social innovators, research institutions, etc … are increasingly playing a role in safeguarding, developing, and co-managing abandoned resources. David Harvey defines urban commoning as a social practice of commoning “This practice produces or establishes a social relation with a common whose uses are either exclusive to a social group or partially or fully open to all and sundry. At the heart of the practice of commoning lies the principle that the relation between the social group and that aspect of the environment being treated as a common shall be both collective and non -commodified-off-limits to the logic of market exchange and market valuations”. A consistent definition is provided by Ozkan ¨ and Büyüksaraç: “The concept of commoning articulates the dynamic and transformative quality of the commons, as well as the relationality and performativity inherent to them. The dynamic and transformative aspect implies that a commons is not a static resource, but a constitution of social networks that seek to co-create and sustain a life-world based on a continuously debated ethos”.
 Foster and Iaione, identify the raw and vacant urban lands as a commons and consider some of the abandoned or not in use public and private structures and buildings in the urban environment as open access commons “… some abandoned or underutilized public and private structures and buildings in the city should constitute commons. Some of these resources, under certain conditions, mimic the conventional characteristics of an open access commons—subject to rivalry and overconsumption or degradation—and giving rise to classic commons management and governance dilemmas”. The two scholars propose a set of democratic design principals aimed at co-governing the city as an economy of commons, namely: horizontal subsidiarity, collaboration, and polycentrism. By horizontal subsidiarity, the scholars refer to the readiness of authorities at different scales to empower the commoning process by facilitating and enabling citizenry initiatives aimed at managing a common good for the benefit of the society. In this regard, citizens are considered city-makers willing to share the responsibility and risks of safeguarding the commons but also to guarantee inclusivity and access. Collaboration is the second founding principle of the democratic design. It is envisioned as the medium through which a multiplicity of networks of individuals and institutions co-operate, co-govern commons and co-create shared values or collective goods. Finally, the scholars build on Elinor Ostrom’s framework for polycentric governance and adopt polycentrism as the third principal of democratic design. This principal foresees that each player/actor has its own rules and should collaborate and interact interdependently in order to co-provide products and services. 
Cultural heritage is recognized internationally as a common good that contributes to the sustainable and inclusive development of cities. In 2020, the President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, launched the New European Bauhaus as part of the Green Deal. “I want NextGenerationEU to kickstart a European renovation wave and make our Union a leader in the circular economy. But this is not just an environmental or economic project: it needs to be a new cultural project for Europe”. 
Fusco Girard proposes adaptive reuse of cultural heritage as the entry point to the circular economy. “The functional reuse of cultural heritage is proposed here as the entry point to the circular economy. It introduces, at the same time, a social/human foundation and a cultural foundation to the New Green Deal. Therefore, the reuse no longer becomes only green.” The scholar suggests using a systemic approach which takes into account the interdependencies between the multiple values related to cultural heritage and their positive/negative impacts. For this reason, he develops a general framework for circular re-use of heritage assets with a twofold objective: shedding light on the interdependent productivity of adaptive reuse of cultural heritage; and its capacity to perform a green transition shaped by a human-centered, collaborative vision. 
A rich literature is burgeoning on the contribution of adaptive reuse to generating economic, social, environmental, emotional and wellbeing impacts and values. More specifically, the multidimensional impacts of adaptive reuse under the framework of the circular economy were assessed by H2020 project CLIC.
The Renovation Wave and the New European Bauhaus, describe how cultural heritage is crucial to implementing the Green Deal strategies. While the European Cultural Heritage Green Paper strive to “inspire and mobilise the worlds of cultural heritage, environment, and all other sectors to join forces to contribute to resolute and transformative climate action and to ensure a better future for all”. By exploring the links between adaptive reuse of cultural heritage and the circular economy, Fusco Girard explores both the bio-ecological and humanistic perspective. He posits a theoretical framework where he describes the reused heritage assets as living systems: “the relational context (with a reciprocal set of interdependencies which enhance the quality of life). According to the scholar, this living system has three interdependent capacities: regenerative capacity, generative capacity and symbiotic capacity. By regenerative capacity, Fusco Girard refers to the concept of the circular economy related to replacing the linear end-of-life concept with new circular flows of reuse in an integrated processes aimed at expanding the lifespan and use value of the asset. Thus, the self-regeneration capacity of a cultural heritage asset is related to the interplay between its intrinsic value and instrumental values (economic, social and environmental resources invested in its preservation) over time. The generative capacity refers to the capacity of the reused heritage asset to yield positive cultural, economic, social and environmental externalities. Finally, the symbiotic capacity refers to the “material and immaterial relations between the heritage asset and the context”. Inspired by the circular loops concept, the scholar highlights the importance of the collaborative ecosystems that help using resources efficiently while generating multidimensional positive outcomes. “stressing the role of the key components for the human scale of development: the cooperative capacity, able to stimulate synergies and symbioses through circular relationships, thus transforming the cultural assets into ecosystems of economic-socio-cultural integration, that is into self-sustainable ecosystems”.
This research paper aims at contributing to the debate on the crucial role of cultural heritage in transitioning towards a circular economy. Through the lens of heritage as a living system, this paper explores how the entrepreneurial journey of an award-winning industrial heritage building, namely: De Hoorn in Leuven, Belgium, led to establishing a positive social impact real estate developer, namely: Miss Miyagi. This young Belgian start-up initiated another award-winning industrial heritage building and launched an innovative cooperative investment fund. By narrating a positive impact entrepreneurial journey, this paper showcases the role heritage, plays as a unique opportunity for commoning innovation and contributing to the circular perspective. It also sheds light on the regenerative, generative and symbiotic capacities of this living system.