This research paper aims at contributing to the debate on the crucial role of adaptive reuse of cultural heritage in transitioning towards a circular-human centered adaptive reuse. Through the lens of heritage as a living system (Fusco Girard 2019), this paper explores how the entrepreneurial journey of an award-winning industrial heritage building, namely: De Hoorn in Leuven, Belgium, led to establishing a positive impact real estate developer, namely: Miss Miyagi. This young Belgian start-up initiated another award-winning industrial heritage building and launched an innovative cooperative investment fund. By narrating a positive impact entrepreneurial journey, this paper showcases the role heritage plays as a unique opportunity for commoning, innovation and contributing to the circular perspective. Finally, since the opportunity, entrepreneurial characteristic, and the process are not the only essential ingredients to success, this paper highlights how building an ecosystem and being supported by an enabling environment was also crucial. In the first part of this paper, the living system experience is put into context. In the second part, the author sheds light on the regenerative, generative, and symbiotic capacities of this living system (Fusco Girard 2019). Finally, the last part reflects on this novel experience.
This paper aimed at discussing circular-human centered adaptive reuse through a seminal practical case-study, namely Miss Miyagi. The success of this young start-up was possible not only because of the visionary leadership and characteristic of the cultural entrepreneur, in this case, Michiel Van Balen, but also thanks to the organization behind him, Miss Miyagi, and to the adoption of positive impact business models. The strength of this model is that reuse, recycling, and regeneration of materials is accompanied with a particular attention towards collaboration, commoning, solidarity and trust. An ecosystem of services (purpose brands, service brands and spin off brands), that puts users first and focuses on adaptive reuse that stimulates new collaborations. Enabling therefore, “material and immaterial relations between the heritage asset and the context” (Fusco Girard 2019:262). Nevertheless, the environment was also a considerable enabler of the process. This innovative approach was met with enthusiasm from the city and region. This is because both authorities recognized that the idea of matchmaking buildings, users and investors while focusing on positive impact is crucial for the redevelopment of special buildings, namely, abandoned heritage buildings and sites. As a result, the city of Leuven updated its priorities in terms of innovation and partnered in projects while Flanders region supported Miss Miyagi with subsidies.
While a rich literature on the intrinsic and instrumental values of heritage already exists, this case-study contributes mainly to better understand the relational value. “A common feature of the circular and human centered reuse is the search for synergies/cooperation between different subjects or groups of subjects and between these and the institutions. This characteristic reflects and nourish the social capital. Cooperation is the secret engine of adaptive reuse practices because it multiplies synergies, and thus the social capital, the community” (Fusco Girard 2019:261). This young start-up, captures value(s) (regenerative capacity), creates new ones (generative capacity) and provides evidence-based practice of how crucial commoning and collaboration are for fulfilling the circular prophecy from a human-centered perspective (symbiotic capacity). Without explicitly embracing the democratic design principals set by Foster and Iaione (2016), Miss Miyagi’s journey in activating heritage sites also provides evidence of how heritage can be co-governed as an economy of commons. In terms of horizontal subsidiarity, the local and regional authorities empowered the commoning process at De Hoorn, Hal 5 and the innovative cooperative investment fund. Collaboration is the founding principle of Miss Miyagi’s philosophy and the case-study shed light on how a multiplicity of networks of individuals and institutions co-operate, co-govern commons and co-create shared values or collective goods. Finally, polycentrism is tangible in the governance model where in every project, each player/actor has its own rules and collaborates/interacts interdependently to co-provide products and services.
Through the lens of heritage as a living system, the author analyzed how adaptive reuse of cultural heritage is managed by a positive impact real estate developer. When addressing the circular economy, most of the time we speak about waste, sometime about mobility, energy but we barely hear/read about tackling the value of regenerating human relationships, solidarity, trust, and local collaboration. This is where the work of Miss Miyagi is innovative. The fact that a real estate developer focuses on cultural heritage and embraces a positive impact business model is quite unique. Miss Miyagi offers its services not only to develop real estate but also to share its vision about improving the built environment and making a social impact.