This research paper aims to contribute to the discussion on the critical role of cultural heritage adaptive reuse in the shift to a circular, human-centered adaptive reuse. This paper examines how the entrepreneurial journey of an award-winning industrial heritage building, namely De Hoorn in Leuven, Belgium, led to the establishment of a positive impact real estate developer, namely: Fusco Girard (Fusco Girard 2019). Miyagi Miss Another honorable industrial heritage building was started by this emerging Belgian business, along with an original cooperative investment fund. This paper highlights the role heritage plays as a unique opportunity for commoning, innovation, and contributing to the circular perspective by narrating a successful entrepreneurial journey. Finally, this paper emphasizes how creating an ecosystem and having support from an enabling environment was also crucial because opportunity, entrepreneurial trait, and process are not the only essential ingredients to success. The context of the living system experience is provided in the first section of this paper. The author illuminates the generative, regenerative, and symbiotic capabilities of this living system in the second section (Fusco Girard 2019) The final section considers this unique experience. His paper discussed circular-human-centered adaptive reuse using Miss Miyagi as a key real-world example. This young start-success up's was made possible not only by Michiel Van Balen's visionary leadership and traits as a cultural entrepreneur, but also by the Miss Miyagi organization that supported him and the adoption of positive impact business models. The benefit of this model is that it emphasizes cooperation, commoning, solidarity, and trust in addition to the reuse, recycling, and regeneration of materials. a network of services (purpose brands, service brands, and spinoff brands) that prioritizes users and places a strong emphasis on adaptive reuse to foster new partnerships so that "material and immaterial relations between the heritage asset and the context" are enabled (Fusco Girard 2019:262) However, the environment also played a significant role in facilitating the process. The city and region embraced this novel approach with enthusiasm. This is so that special buildings, such as abandoned heritage buildings and sites, can be developed while focusing on positive impact. Both authorities have acknowledged the importance of matching buildings, users, and investors. As a result, the region of Flanders provided Miss Miyagi with subsidies while the city of Leuven revised its priorities for innovation and collaborated on projects. Although there is a wealth of literature on the intrinsic and practical values of heritage, this case study primarily advances knowledge of the relational value. The search for synergies/cooperation between various subjects or groups of subjects, as well as between these and the institutions, is a common aspect of the circular and human-centered reuse. This quality reflects and strengthens social capital. Cooperation multiplies synergies and subsequently the social capital, the community, making it the "secret engine" of adaptive reuse practices (Fusco Girard 2019:261) This young company captures value(s), generates new value(s), and offers evidence-based practice of how important commoning and collaboration are from a human-centered perspective for fulfilling the circular prophecy (symbiotic capacity) Miss Miyagi's experience activating heritage sites also demonstrates how heritage can be co-governed as an economy of commons without explicitly embracing the democratic design principles established by Foster and Iaione (2016). In terms of horizontal subsidiarity, the local and regional authorities supported Hal 5, the creative cooperative investment fund, and the commoning process at De Hoorn. The case study illuminated how a variety of networks of people and institutions cooperate, co-govern commons, and co-create shared values or collective goods. Collaboration is the guiding principle of Miss Miyagi's philosophy. The governance model, where each player/actor in a project has their own rules and collaborates/interacts interdependently to co-provide goods and services, is the final tangible example of polycentrism. The author examined how a real estate developer with a positive social impact manages the adaptive reuse of cultural heritage through the lens of heritage as a living system. Most of the time when discussing the circular economy, we talk about waste, occasionally about mobility and energy, but we hardly ever hear or read about the importance of regenerating interpersonal connections, solidarity, trust, and local cooperation. Here is where Miss Miyagi's work is novel. It is quite unusual for a real estate developer to prioritize cultural heritage and adopt a business strategy that has a positive social impact. In addition to providing services for real estate development, Miss Miyagi also shares its vision for enhancing the built environment and having an impact on society.