Urban commoning employing the Lefebvrian “right to the city” framework proliferated since the 1960s.
Experimentations and practices of urban commoning took different forms amongst others: community gardens; urban farming; limited equity cooperatives; land trusts ; living labs, city-making, fablabs and Peer to Peer production as well as exclusionary commons such as gated communities and privatized public spaces.
David Harvey defines urban commoning as a social practice of commoning “This practice produces or establishes a social relation with a common whose uses are either exclusive to a social group or partially or fully open to all and sundry.
A consistent definition is provided by Ozkan ¨ and Büyüksaraç: “The concept of commoning articulates the dynamic and transformative quality of the commons, as well as the relationality and performativity inherent to them. 
Foster and Iaione, identify the raw and vacant urban lands as a commons and consider some of the abandoned or not in use public and private structures and buildings in the urban environment as open access commons “… some abandoned or underutilized public and private structures and buildings in the city should constitute commons.
Finally, the scholars build on Elinor Ostrom’s framework for polycentric governance and adopt polycentrism as the third principal of democratic design. 
In 2020, the President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, launched the New European Bauhaus as part of the Green Deal.
Fusco Girard proposes adaptive reuse of cultural heritage as the entry point to the circular economy.
It introduces, at the same time, a social/human foundation and a cultural foundation to the New Green Deal. 
 The Renovation Wave and the New European Bauhaus, describe how cultural heritage is crucial to implementing the Green Deal strategies. While the European Cultural Heritage Green Paper strive to “inspire and mobilise the worlds of cultural heritage, environment, and all other sectors to join forces to contribute to resolute and transformative climate action and to ensure a better future for all”.
Through the lens of heritage as a living system, this paper explores how the entrepreneurial journey of an award-winning industrial heritage building, namely: De Hoorn in Leuven, Belgium, led to establishing a positive social impact real estate developer, namely: Miss Miyagi.
