India had 11.1 million vacant housing units in 2011 comprising 12.4% of its urban housing stock. The fact that a large number of vacant housing units exist alongside high housing prices and an acute housing shortage of 18.8 million units is a puzzle. India is not alone in this regard. Cities in Mexico and China also have high vacancies. With cities around the world facing severe housing shortages, the issue of vacant housing – the apparent opposite of a shortage – has gained prominence.
We show that the paradox of high vacant housing in the presence of a severe housing shortage in India is a function of insecure property rights. In an efficient market, a rental contract between the landlord and the tenant is an allocation of rights of ownership of the property determined by the two parties for a period of time. The contract’s aim is to define precisely these property rights thereby reducing uncertainties, risks, and disputes. We hypothesise that institutions that undermine the certainty about the terms of these contracts lead to an inefficient outcome such as higher vacancies than would be found in efficient markets. Specifically in a world of contract uncertainty, landlords may prefer the option of keeping the unit vacant relative to the possibility of being hampered by a low-paying and disputatious tenant.
Two phenomena could create uncertainty in this allocation of rights of ownership between the landlord and the tenant. First, rent control, whose aim is to protect tenants from rent increases and evictions, alters the allocation of ownership in favor of the tenant. Second, if courts take long to resolve disputes, the ownership of the property could de-facto belong to the tenant for this duration and thus increase the risks for the landlord. Lengthy judicial resolution of claims raises costs, even if the correct outcomes are eventually realized. Additionally, weak contract enforcement owing to high judicial pendency raises the incentives of tenants to renege on the contract. The presence of either of these two conditions reduces ex-ante incentives for the landlord to engage in a rental contract. High vacancy rates are a natural consequence of reducing the benefits and raising the costs to a landlord of renting.
Academic literature on reasons for vacant housing has looked at the impact of government housing finance, inequality, restrictive regulations, rent control and investments in housing for speculative purposes. We add to this literature by looking at how insecure property rights in India, as a result of rent control and weak contract enforcement, increase vacancy rates.
We will argue that rent control laws in India, laws which are also found in other countries, have led some owners of properties to prefer keeping units vacant to renting them out. These laws thus lead to the simultaneous reduction in housing units available for rent (and, hence, a rise in prices) and an increase in vacancy of housing units. We show that the repeal of such laws could lead to more rental units and lower vacancy. Developing countries often have overstretched judiciary systems which are unable to resolve expeditiously contract disputes, including tenant-landlord disputes. We argue that weak contract enforcement, an acute problem in India, adversely affects housing markets. As such, India provides an object lesson for other countries.
The negative impact of hard rent control on housing markets is well documented in the literature but few papers, to our knowledge, document its possible impact on housing vacancy.
The negative impact of hard rent control on housing markets is well documented in the literature but few papers, to our knowledge, document its possible impact on housing vacancy.
Our results show that a pro-landlord policy move that relaxes rent revisions could potentially reduce housing vacancy by 2.8 to 3.1 percentage points and lead to a net welfare gain. Such a move, we estimate, would also reduce India’s housing shortage. We estimate that the housing shortage would drop as much as 7.5% in states that liberalize their rent revision laws. This paper adds to earlier work done by Malpezzi and Tewari, who look at the relationship between state level urban vacancy rates in 1981 and rent control regulations in India. They find that stringent rent control laws have no impact on housing vacancy. A lot has changed in the past few decades in housing markets in India. In particular, vacancy rates increased from 8% in 1981 to 12% in 2011 and many states reformed their rent control laws post 1991. These changes in both vacancy rates and rent control laws make a strong case for revisiting this question. Moreover, Malpezzi and Tewari report correlations and multivariate regressions, whereas we perform panel regressions.
We also hypothesize that slow-moving judicial systems discourage property owners from renting to tenants; so far as we know, we are the first to test this hypothesis. We measure judiciary efficiency at the district level with the number of district judges per 1000 persons. We find that, a one to two standard deviation increase in judges per 1000 persons (urban) could reduce vacancy by 0.43 to 0.86 percentage points. We address possible endogeneity concerns using an instrument – distance of a district to the High Court.
This paper is divided into the following sections. Section 2 is a broad overview of the housing market in India, with a focus on rental and vacant housing. Section 3 frames the problem of renting within the property rights framework. Section 4 describes the data sources and Section 5 discusses the empirical strategy. Section 6 presents results. Section 7 looks at the welfare implications of rent control policy changes and Section 8 concludes.