One housing paradox in many markets is the simultaneous presence of high costs and high vacancy rates. India has expensive housing relative to incomes and an urban housing vacancy rate of 12.4%. We show how insecure property rights in India, as a result of rent control and weak contract enforcement, increases vacancy rates. Using a two-way linear fixed effects panel regression, we exploit changes in rent control laws in the states of West Bengal, Karnataka, Gujarat, and Maharashtra to find that pro-tenant laws are positively related to vacancy rates. A pro-landlord policy change liberalizing rent adjustments could potentially reduce vacancy rates by 2.8 to 3.1 percentage points. Contract enforcement measured by density of judges is negatively related to vacancy. We estimate that a policy change in rent control laws would have a net welfare benefit and could reduce India’s housing shortage by 7.5%.
This paper examines the characteristics and possible explanations for urban vacant housing in India. The U.S. experience would lead us to expect places which relied more on rental housing to have higher overall housing vacancy rates than those that relied on owning. However, this is not the case in India.
We find two explanations for vacancy rates: pro-tenant rent control laws and the size of the contract enforcement infrastructure. We exploit changes in the rent control laws in the Indian states of West Bengal, Karnataka, Gujarat, and Maharashtra to establish a relationship between pro-tenant rent control laws and vacancy rates in districts between 2001 and 2011. Our results show that a pro-landlord policy move that relaxes rent revisions could potentially reduce housing vacancy by 2.8 to 3.1 percentage points. Poor contract enforcement, measured by number of judges normalized by population, is negatively related with vacancy rates.
The findings of our paper indicate that rent control reform and judicial capacity are two areas in need of urgent attention from policymakers. The Model Tenancy Act, approved in June 2021 by the Government of India, aims to address both issues. It allows for setting rents at market rates and requires separate fast track courts to resolve disputes between tenants and landlords. If states adopt this Act then our findings suggest that vacant housing will decline.
We estimate that a policy change in rent control laws would have a net welfare benefit and could reduce the housing shortage in India by 7.5%. Given that it simultaneously has a small number of formal housing units per family by world standards and a high vacancy rate, India can almost surely allocate its housing resources more efficiently and equitably.