High costs and high vacancy rates are two housing paradoxes that exist in many markets. India has a 12.4% urban housing vacancy rate and expensive housing relative to incomes. We demonstrate how weak contract enforcement and rent control lead to insecure property rights in India, which raises vacancy rates. We exploit changes in rent control laws in the states of West Bengal, Karnataka, Gujarat, and Maharashtra and find that pro-tenant laws are positively correlated with vacancy rates using a two-way linear fixed effects panel regression. Rent adjustments made more permissive under a pro-landlord policy could potentially lower vacancy rates by 2.8 to 3.1 percentage points. Vacancy is inversely correlated with the density of judges used to measure contract enforcement. According to our calculations, changing the rent control laws would increase welfare and help India's housing shortage by 7.5%. This essay explores the traits and potential causes of urban vacant housing in India. The U.S. experience would lead us to anticipate that areas where renting out homes was more prevalent would have higher overall housing vacancy rates than areas where owning homes was more prevalent. In India, though, this is not the case. We discover two reasons for vacancy rates: the size of the infrastructure for contract enforcement and pro-tenant rent control laws. To establish a connection between pro-tenant rent control laws and vacancy rates in districts between 2001 and 2011, we take advantage of changes to the rent control laws in the Indian states of West Bengal, Karnataka, Gujarat, and Maharashtra. Our findings suggest that a landlord-friendly policy change that relaxes the rules on rent increases could potentially lower housing vacancy rates by 2.8 to 3.1 percentage points. Poor contract enforcement is correlated negatively with vacancy rates as measured by the number of judges normalized by population. The results of our study show that judicial capacity and rent control reform are two issues that require policymakers' immediate attention. Both issues are intended to be addressed by the Model Tenancy Act, which the Government of India approved in June 2021. Rents may be set at market rates, and tenant-landlord disputes must be resolved in separate fast-track courts. Our findings suggest that vacant housing will decrease if states implement this Act. According to our calculations, changing the rent control laws would increase welfare and help India's housing shortage by 7.5%. India can almost certainly distribute its housing resources more effectively and fairly given that it has a high vacancy rate and a low number of formal housing units per family by global standards.