For many decades, central banks throughout the world have had their independence with respect to monetary policy conditional on having to explain their policy actions, usually in formal hearings before the national legislature. The appearances of central bank heads before elected politicians often receive considerable media coverage, and their words are closely parsed to discern the direction in which the country’s economy is heading. The core purpose of these deliberative hearings is to hold central bankers to account for their policy decisions: questions are asked, and answers are given. In this sense the hearings are deliberative, meaning that reasoned argumentation is fundamental. More broadly, deliberative democracy scholars have long argued that deliberation is a desirable component of democratic governance, as it is seen to enhance political legitimacy, attitudes of public-spiritedness, more interest in political participation, and ultimately better public policy. However, what is less self-evident is the deliberative standard by which accountability hearings in national legislatures may be judged. What is “good” and “bad” deliberative accountability?
Moreover, in a comparative framework, it is also unclear just how much the institutional setting of the national legislature may shape the quality of both questions asked and answers given. The focus of this paper is the quality of deliberative accountability for the decisions made by monetary policymakers, and the extent to which this relates to attributes of the hearings within a specific institutional setting. We use the metrics of reciprocity and non-partisanship to gauge deliberative accountability and examine these in the context of verbatim legislative hearing transcripts.
We examine monetary policy accountability hearings in the United Kingdom and the United States, leading up to and including the period of the financial crisis, and use as data the hearing transcripts for the Treasury Select Committee (in the UK) and both the House Financial Services Committee and the Senate Banking Committee (in the US). The financial crisis is an ideal period since both countries experienced many of the same conditions of, and effects from, the financial crisis, and so this period offers parallels in how each political system and its central bank responded to these conditions, and it is precisely during a crisis when monetary policy and other statutory responsibilities are highly relevant. Aside from similarities in the immediate context of the financial crisis, both central banks operate “independently”, and representatives from both are required by statute to appear regularly before their respective legislatures. Importantly, the two country cases also embody fundamental differences in their approaches to accountability in monetary policy—in part, the product of their presidential and parliamentary systems. Given similarities in the statutory requirements of each central bank along with others in the political-economic context facing each country during the financial crisis, we can take these features as “constant” and thus focus predominantly on differences in the institutional contexts and norms in their respective hearings to reveal the effect of these on the quality of deliberative accountability in monetary policy oversight hearings.
We seek to gauge the quality of deliberation by combining quantitative text analysis of parliamentary and congressional hearing transcripts, with systematic qualitative hand coding for key measures of deliberative quality. The latter analysis uncovers subtleties in reciprocity and partisanship by examining bilateral exchanges between the central bank head and individual legislators. A related literature on “central bank communication” focuses on how central banks communicate their actions and decisions to wider audiences. This literature has sought to understand forms of communication by, for example, the Bank of England, the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund. These studies typically examine communication (say, of speeches or statements) as flowing one-way, and this is targeted at some specified audience. In contrast, the present paper examines communication in an explicitly deliberative setting, where a dialogue exists between legislators and central bankers.
A second related literature addresses central bank accountability. While some of these studies examine the parliamentary setting in which central banks are held to account, even these do not gauge whether, for example, oversight hearings adhere to any of the norms of deliberation which have received extensive attention in the deliberative democracy literature. We do recognize that multiple forms of accountability exist for central banks; however, the focus here is on the legislative setting in which monetary policymakers are required to explain their policy decisions, in an exchange which is intended to be deliberative in nature.
To summarize in advance, our comparative analysis provides empirical evidence that, at least in monetary policy hearings during periods of stress, the legislative setting certainly does shape the degree of reciprocity and extent of partisanship in the deliberative interactions between politicians and central bank officials. The analysis of the transcripts reveals that the two country cases represent two very different approaches to deliberative accountability. The UK adopts an approach of deliberative interaction between central bankers and parliamentarians on all substantive themes, exhibiting reciprocity and minimal partisanship in the hearings. In contrast, the US exhibits little in the way of reciprocal dialogue between the chair of the Federal Reserve and members of Congress. For the US, this appears to allow greater scope to divert discussion away from the primary focus of hearings (i.e., monetary policy).