We use a variety of techniques to evaluate empirically the effectiveness of the deliberative process by which central bankers are held accountable for their policy choices. On the transcripts of monetary policy legislative oversight hearings in the UK and the US during the financial crisis, we employ quantitative text analysis. We discover that the UK outperforms the US in holding the central bank chief responsible for monetary policy, specifically by engaging in a two-way conversation between the legislative committee and the central banker Partisanship, accountability, narrative, and response quality were the four criteria we used to manually code selected exchanges from these transcripts. We find that British MPs ask more pertinent questions about relevant monetary policy topics and rarely use partisan language. In contrast, American MPs tend to be more concerned with winning over their constituents and steer clear of discussing specifics of monetary policy. This study examined monetary policy hearings in comparative perspective to determine how effectively central bankers are held accountable. Do they respond to inquiries? Is the conversation mutual or just for show? Are members of legislative committees interested in learning about and comprehending the factors that led to decisions and actions being taken? As the metrics for deliberative accountability, we have concentrated on both reciprocity and partisan/electoral motivations. This study demonstrates that the political system in which central bank accountability is carried out has a significant impact on the accountability's quality. Select committees in the UK aim to be unbiased, concentrate primarily on carrying out oversight, have a small membership, and closely monitor attendance. In the US, congressional committees are more partisan, participate in both the drafting and oversight of legislation, have large memberships, and enforce attendance regulations less strictly. Another difference between the two systems is that while the Fed Chair testifies alone before Congress, multiple members of the Bank's MPC appear in oversight hearings in the UK. Given these variations in the legal frameworks for accountability, one might anticipate variations in the results. This paper uses partisanship and reciprocal dialogue as two empirical measures to frame the contrast in terms of the quality of deliberation. Our quantitative text analysis has revealed the divergent practices of central bank accountability in the US and the UK, with the crucial factor of reciprocal deliberation. In terms of how much the legislators and members of the respective central banks share a common thematic discourse, this analysis clearly demonstrates a difference between the two country cases. In contrast to the US, where members of Congress and the head of the US central bank have different institutional discourses, the UK shows a shared thematic discourse between MPs and central bankers. According to this analysis, the UK setting demonstrated reciprocity in deliberation, but US congressional committees did not. This indicates that MPs engaged with MPC members on every significant theme in the accountability hearings when looking at all of the hearings during the financial crisis. The presence of multiple MPC members enabled MPs to engage some monetary policy members on specific topics and other MPC members on different topics. Additionally, the MPC as a committee was held accountable in a way that permitted MPC members to specialize in areas of expertise. Reciprocity was institutionally constrained in the US with only the Fed chair testifying, leaving no room for specialization among FOMC members. Furthermore, the themes that the Fed chair and MCs discussed were distinct from one another. We have been able to focus on four key indicators for deliberative accountability—level of partisan rhetoric, use of narrative, extent to which the questioning pertained to the policy area being held to account, and quality of responses—thanks to the granular approach to evaluating both the quality of deliberation and the degree of reciprocity between questioner and witness. We provide additional support for the assertion that the UK committee provides higher-quality deliberative accountability than its American counterparts through this analysis. There is little evidence of partisan rhetoric being used by British MPs when questioning the central bank's president. Additionally, they tend to use less narrative in their deliberative language, but when they do, it helps to frame the query. Members of Congress, on the other hand, tend to use narrative more frequently, and when they do, it's usually to make an appeal to their supporters or take a stand on a controversial issue. It is possible to argue that the use of narratives by lawmakers and congresspeople is motivated by politics. For MPs, this means showcasing their policy expertise (possibly in order to advance to ministerial positions), while for MCs, it means aligning themselves with their constituents in order to strengthen their electoral connection. Members of the UK TSC also focus more of their inquiries on the policy that is being held accountable (here, monetary policy) Senators and Representatives deviate from the course of action they are trying to hold the Fed chair accountable for. This has an interesting exception during times of financial crisis, when congressional inquiries more closely follow the central bank's statutory mandate. In summary, it appears that parliamentary questioning is superior to congressional questioning as measured by these measures of deliberative accountability. We outlined a number of institutional differences between the oversight committees in each country earlier in our paper (e.g. , the ability to draft legislation which may make congressional committees more susceptible to lobbying and partisan pressures; contrasting numbers of support staff and committee members; appearance of multiple MPC members versus the Fed chair appearing alone; reading out prepared statements; and attendance for committee hearings) We aimed to investigate the deliberative outcomes of these oversight hearings rather than disentangle and isolate the individual effects of each of these differences as inputs. In other words, when taken together, these various institutional characteristics seem to produce very different results in deliberative accountability. We made an effort to categorize and quantify these various outcomes, but we did not aim to provide any suggested course of action.