We employ multiple methods to gauge empirically the quality of the deliberative process whereby central bankers are held to account for their policy decisions. We use quantitative text analysis on the monetary policy legislative oversight hearing transcripts in the UK and US during the financial crisis. We find that the UK performs significantly better than the US in holding the central bank head to account on monetary policy, namely by engaging in a reciprocal dialogue between the legislative committee and the central banker. We then manually code selected exchanges from these transcripts, according to four criteria of deliberation: partisanship, accountability, narrative and response quality. We find that British MPs invoke almost no partisan rhetoric and target their questions more to relevant aspects of monetary policy; by comparison, their American counterparts seek to appeal more to their constituents and tend to veer away from discussing the details of monetary policy.
This paper has explored, in comparative perspective, monetary policy hearings to gauge the extent to which central bankers are effectively held to account. Do they answer the questions asked? Is the dialogue reciprocal or diversionary? Are legislative committee members interested in uncovering and understanding the reasons for decisions made and actions taken? We have focused on both reciprocity and partisan/electoral motivations as the metrics for deliberative accountability.
This paper finds that central bank accountability is highly specific to the political system in which the accountability is conducted: the legislative setting shapes the quality of accountability. In the UK, select committees strive to be non-partisan, focus predominantly on conducting oversight, have small memberships, and carefully monitor attendance. In the US, congressional committees are more partisan, engage in drafting legislation as well as conducting oversight, have large memberships and monitor attendance less stringently. The two systems also differ in that in the UK, multiple members of the Bank’s MPC appear in oversight hearings, whereas the Fed Chair appears alone before Congress. Given these differences in the legislative settings for accountability, one would expect some sort of difference in outcomes. This paper has framed the contrast in terms of the quality of deliberation, employing two empirical measures—reciprocal dialogue and partisanship.
Our quantitative text analysis has captured contrasting ways in which the UK and US conduct central bank accountability, with the important measure of reciprocal deliberation. This analysis shows a clear difference between the two country cases in terms of the extent to which legislators and members of the respective central banks share a common thematic discourse. The picture in the UK is one of a shared thematic discourse between MPs and central bankers, while that in the US is one of an institutional discourse divide between members of Congress and the head of the US central bank. From this analysis, reciprocity in deliberation was clear in the UK setting, but not in the US congressional committees. What this means is that, taken in the aggregate across all the hearings during the financial crisis, MPs engaged with MPC members on every major theme in the accountability hearings. The appearance of multiple MPC members allowed MPs to engage some monetary policy members on certain themes and other MPC members on other themes; the MPC as a committee was held to account in a way that allowed MPC members to specialize in areas of expertise. In the US, with only the Fed chair testifying, reciprocity was institutionally constrained with no scope for specialization among FOMC members. Moreover, the very themes discussed by the Fed chair and MCs were distinct and separate.
The granular approach to gauging both the quality of deliberation and the degree of reciprocity between questioner and witness has allowed us to narrow our focus to four key indicators for deliberative accountability—level of partisan rhetoric, use of narrative, extent to which the questioning pertained to the policy area being held to account, and the quality of responses. From this analysis, we lend further evidence to the conclusion that the UK committee delivers better quality deliberative accountability than its American counterparts. In questioning the head of the central bank, British MPs are found to invoke almost no partisan rhetoric. They also tend to use narrative less in their deliberative language, but when they do, it serves to contextualize the question. In contrast, members of Congress tend to use more narrative and, when they do, it is invoked to appeal to their constituents or take a political stand of judgment. Arguably, the ways in which parliamentarians and congresspersons use narratives might be seen as serving political purposes—for MPs this means demonstrating their policy expertise (perhaps to seek elevation to ministerial positions) whereas for MCs, this means aligning themselves with their constituents, to enhance their electoral connection.
Members of the UK TSC also target their questions more to the policy being held to account (here, monetary policy). Representatives and senators veer away from the policy to which they are seeking to hold the Fed chair to account. The interesting exception to this is during the financial crisis, when the questioning of members of Congress adheres more closely to the statutory remit of the central bank. In short, the questioning by parliamentarians, as gauged by these indicators for deliberative accountability, appears to be better than that of members of Congress.
Earlier in our paper, we outlined a number of institutional differences between the oversight committees in each country (e.g., the ability to draft legislation which may make congressional committees more susceptible to lobbying and partisan pressures; contrasting numbers of support staff and committee members; appearance of multiple MPC members versus the Fed chair appearing alone; reading out prepared statements; and attendance for committee hearings). Rather than untangling and isolating the individual effects of each of these differences as inputs, we sought to examine the deliberative outcomes of these oversight hearings. That is, cumulatively, these different institutional features appear to create very different outcomes in deliberative accountability. We have sought to identify and measure these different outcomes but do not seek to offer policy prescriptions.