Using incident-level data on domestic-related service calls and crime reports of domestic violence assaults from the 18 major US police departments for which both types of records are available, we empirically investigate the effects of COVID-19 shutdowns on domestic violence. Although we confirm earlier reports of an increase in domestic service calls at the beginning of the pandemic, we find that the rise occurred before required shutdowns, and there was a gradual decline after the government imposed restrictions. Additionally, we discover no evidence of an uptick in domestic violence crimes. Instead, during the first shutdown period, police reports of domestic violence assaults significantly decreased. Intimate partner homicides did not significantly change during the shutdown months, and victimization survey reports of intimate partner violence decreased. Our findings refute the notion that shutdowns increased domestic violence, and they advise caution before inferring anything from or basing policy solely on information from police calls. In order to more fully characterize the empirical data on the impact of the pandemic, this paper uses incident-level police data on DV calls and crimes from significant US cities that provided both measures. The evidence presented here does not support an increase in DV rates during mandatory shutdowns, in contrast to many media reports and arguments made by opponents of pandemic shutdowns (such as Biggs, 2020). Instead, we discover substantial drops in the number of DV assault incidents that have been reported, which we argue is unlikely to be the result of a decrease in the tendency of police to report crimes, in part because the decline is also seen for aggravated assaults. We might anticipate a rise in fatalities associated with DV during shutdowns if police weren't responding to these most serious crimes. Data on suicides or homicides involving intimate partners do not support this. Data from a national survey on crime victimization do not show any indication that the population is experiencing a rise in nonfatal IPV. Shutdowns appear to have reduced recorded DV, but this finding should not be interpreted as a sign that US concerns about DV in the pandemic were unfounded. Contrarily, it's possible that increased federal support service funding and community and private sector initiatives helped to improve victim and survivor support systems and raise awareness (increasing DV calls to police during the initial emergency period). These actions should be taken into consideration during upcoming pandemic shutdowns as well as ongoing policy efforts to reduce DV because they may have lowered DV assault rates. This essay also demonstrates the difficulties faced by researchers who wish to offer timely proof to guide DV-related public policy. Future DV research and population health surveillance would benefit greatly from improved real-time police data resources that are widely available across agencies and have formal standards and requirements for data quality and elements.