We empirically investigate the impact of COVID-19 shutdowns on domestic violence using incident-level data on both domestic-related calls for service and crime reports of domestic violence assaults from the 18 major US police departments for which both types of records are available. Although we confirm prior reports of an increase in domestic calls for service at the start of the pandemic, we find that the increase preceded mandatory shutdowns, and there was an incremental decline following the government imposition of restrictions. We also find no evidence that domestic violence crimes increased. Rather, police reports of domestic violence assaults declined significantly during the initial shutdown period. There was no significant change in intimate partner homicides during shutdown months and victimization survey reports of intimate partner violence were lower. Our results fail to support claims that shutdowns increased domestic violence and suggest caution before drawing inference or basing policy solely on data from calls to police.
This paper uses incident-level police data on DV calls and crimes from major US cities that provided both measures to characterize the empirical evidence on the impact of pandemic more fully. Contrary to many media reports and claims by opponents of pandemic shutdowns (e.g., Biggs, 2020), the evidence presented here does not support an increase in DV rates during mandatory shutdowns. Instead, we find significant decreases in recorded DV assault incidents that we argue is unlikely to come from a lower propensity of police to file crime reports, in part because the decline is present for aggravated assaults. If police were failing to respond to these most serious crimes, we might expect to see increased fatalities related to DV during shutdowns. This is not what we find in data on intimate-partner homicides or suicides. We also find no evidence of an increase in nonfatal IPV in the population from national survey data on crime victimization.
The conclusion that recorded DV appears to have been lowered by shutdowns should not be interpreted as evidence that concerns regarding DV in the pandemic were unwarranted in the US. On the contrary, it is possible that increased federal funding for support services, as well as community and private sector efforts, contributed to raising awareness (and elevating DV calls to police during the initial emergency period) and improving support systems for victims and survivors. These measures may have contributed to lower DV assault rates and should therefore be considered during future pandemic shutdowns and also as ongoing policy efforts to reduce DV. This paper also illustrates the challenges faced by researchers who want to provide timely evidence to inform public policy related to DV. Enhanced real-time police data resources, with broad coverage across agencies and formal standards and requirements for data quality and elements, would be invaluable for future DV research and population health surveillance